Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

The social indicator: An index of the quality of life

A. George Gitter & David |. Mostofsky

To cite this article: A. George Gitter & David |. Mostofsky (1973) The social indicator: An index
of the quality of life, Social Biology, 20:3, 289-297, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1973.9988056

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1973.9988056

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB arr | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
alil Article views: 1
N
Q View related articles 4

wa Citing articles: 1 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

 
 

The Social Indicator: An Index of the

Quality of Life

A. George Gitter and David I.

Department of Psychology
Boston University
Boston, Massachusetts

The recent interest in social accounting
as a tool for measuring the “quality of life”
has raised a number of questions concerning
the nature and function of social indicators
‘= (American Academy of Political and Social
20 Science, 1967; Gross, 1968). These questions include such considerations as the
biases in the gathering of social statistics
(Bauer, 1966), the role of social indicators
in policy decisions (U. S. Dept. of Health,
Education, and Welfare, 1969), their rela
tionship to economic indicators (Olson,
1969), the methodology of indexing (Gitter, unpublished), and other theoretical
(American Academy of Political and
Social Science, 1970) and methodological
(D’Agostino, 1971) problems.

In the face of this upsurge in research
activity in the area of social indicators, it
is surprising to find a number of problems
which have been scarcely considered. As
examples of questions that would seem to
demand serious consideration, we may consider the following: How are the various
aspects of a person’s life related to each
other? Should a social indicator be based
on objective or subjective data? What is the
relative importance of the respective components which constitute the entries for a
single estimate of quality of life (as per
] at 13:34 08 December 2015

an

Downloaded by versity of Michi

 

Mostofsky

ceived by respondents)? How does the
perceived level of quality of life affect a
person’s rating of the quality of his own
life? How do the ratings of the level and
importance of various aspects of life vary
from one group to another? How are a
person’s ratings of the level of quality and
importance of various aspects of his life
related to his personality and demographic
characteristics?

Some of the issues in social accounting
have no corresponding analog. Constructors of indicators in business, for example,
can afford the luxury of refining techniques
or designing data banks. They have far to
travel yet, and social indicators lag much
behind them even in designs. But at the
very least, they are fortunate to have arrived at some consensus with discriminating
relevant phenomena (gross national product, earnings, productivity). To be sure,
there is no definitive description of “productivity,” but as a concept it is seen to be
necessary for the descriptive or predictive
equations being developed. Unfortunately,
social science data (a) has not approached
agreement on the necessary or sufficient
information which could be incorporated in
an index, and (b) the metric form of a
datum, or particular attribute of a phe
289
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

290 Gitter and
nomenon which 7s seen as propaedeutic for
designing a social indicator (e.g., happiness), differs from investigator to investigator to such a degree that reliance on
previously gathered data is either useless
or incompatible for any purposes of comparison. The larger issue of standardization
(of concepts, techniques, and data forms)
is in itself an overwhelmingly complex one
which cannot adequately be explored here.
This paper will be restricted to a discussion
of some of the questions raised above, with
the knowledge that the larger unresolved
questions remain in the background.

QUALITY OF LIFE

In considering these matters, one cannot avoid the responsibility to define rigorously what is implied by the concept of a
social indicator, to describe its nature, and
to specify the respective functions it may
serve. Even before considering social indicators, one must perhaps first establish what
is meant by “quality of life,’ a concept
which is closely related to social accounting and which stimulated much of the
recent interest.

For the purposes of this paper, “quality
of life” will refer to the condition of a person’s day-to-day existence, where the “level
of quality of life” refers to some point
which may be represented on a scale devised
to measure the relevant conditions. Since
quality of life is obviously affected by a
number of events (e.g., state of health, relationships with family and with others,
etc.), one can properly consider quality of
life either as a unitary construct involving
all of the condition of a person’s life as a
whole, which includes all of the phenomena
that in the aggregate account for the
quality of his life. Alternately, one can
focus on the separate aspects of a person’s
life, such as his health, his economic condition, etc. The latter is in fact the method

Mostofsky Social Biology
used by the authors of Toward A Social
Report, who describe “an attempt, on the
part of social scientists, to look at several
important areas and digest what is known
about progress toward generally accepted
goals” (U.S. Dept. of Health, Education,
and Welfare, 1969, p. xiv). In that report,
seven areas were chosen: (1) health and
illness; (2) social mobility; (3) physical
environment; (4) income and poverty;
(5) public order and safety; (6) learning,
science, and art; (7) participation and
alienation. We have referred to these areas
as aspects of life. More specifically, however, these seven areas represent what we
will call the “HEW aspects,” as compared
to other facets of personal relations, and
others, which we will call the “non-HEW
aspects” of life. Any future efforts toward
a comprehensive assessment of quality of
life must take both of these sets of variables into consideration.

Although there is hope that at some
future date social accounting will reach the
level of methodological sophistication which
will permit the use of social indicators as
predictive tools, the present embryonic
state of the art suggests more conservative
estimates of short-term promise. It would
seem that the most that could be expected
in the near future for social indicators
would be as markers or pointers of the level
of quality of life at a given period in time.

This role of course does not completely
define the exact nature of a social indicator.
It does not prescribe, for example, whether
a social indicator for education should be a
unitary variable, such as “the number of
high school graduates,” or whether it should
be an index number such as a factor score
derived from an analysis of multivariate
data on education (Gitter and Peterson,
1970). This paper would propose that a
social indicator could be any type of numerical scale which can best describe the

 
Vol. 20, No. 3

level, at a given point in time, of the
quality of life, either as a whole, or of its
various “HEW” and “non-HEW” aspects.

OBJECTIVE VS. SUBJECTIVE
INDICATORS

One important methodological issue of
considerable interest involves the nature
of the data used to construct a social
indicator. Should a social indicator reflect

w factual information about the phenomenon
S under consideration (such as health), or
8 5 should it reflect people’s evaluations of the
= phenomenon, or should it combine features
9 of both?
A The reasonable approach to the objective
S vs. subjective issue would seem to lie in
using both objective and subjective mea“ sures,! and not to combine them, but rather
to construct two types of social indicators.
g, This in turn would provide us with two
= types of information, serving two distinct
S functions; the objective indicators would be
‘= used to provide “factual” information about
& the quality of life, while the subjective indi cators would inform us how people evaluate
-= their life. In this schema, objective indica~ tors would be measures of phenomena which
use other than the subjective standards of
3 respondents. Examples of objective indica3 tors of health might include incidence of
‘<= TB, infant mortality, and perhaps a single
5 index representing the aggregate of morbid9 ity and/or mortality rates from various
causes. These data would be available from
hospital records or from an appropriate governmental agency. Objective indicators

1The terms “objective” and “subjective” are
intended to convey the distinction with respect
to the class of information, whether descriptions
of factual events or evaluations of them, respectively. “Evaluative” has been institutionalized in
terminological use to refer to information derived
from scales which are self-anchoring and connotative, such as “high-low”. “Factual” has been applied to information derived from denotative scales
such as “number of TB deaths.”

Social Indicator 291

could be constructed to act as markers of the
state of reality of the quality of life. They
would provide us with measures comparable
to those available to the economists when
they compute GNP or a Cost-of-Living
Index. Objective indicators could serve as
bench marks and feedback for examining
our progress toward some stated goal or
to indicate retrogression or maintainance
of a status quo, as a consequence of a
particular policy or government program.
Paralleling the set of objective indicators,
a set of subjective indicators could be constructed, These reveal how people evaluate
their life, whether they think that it is
“decent” or not. Subjective indicators reflect subjective evaluations of phenomena,
derived from respondents’ ratings of their
life, either as a whole or some aspect of it
(Sawchuk and Gitter, 1971). Such a rating
reflects a respondent’s judgment of reality,
as he perceives it, against some self-anchoring standard, (“low vs. high,” “enough
vs. not enough,” “good vs. bad”). To some
extent, subjective indicators can be considered as measures of dissonance between a
person’s view of reality, the facts as he
sees them, and his goals and values. For
example, a person’s rating of “incidence of
TB” on a “low vs. high” scale would probably reflect an interaction of his estimate of
the absolute number of people who have TB
together with a preconceived standard of
how much TB he believes is tolerable in a
“decent” society. Each rating indicates
some dissonance between the perception of
what reality zs in the confounding presence
of the belief as to what it should be.
Because subjective indicators are subjective evaluations, their measurement must
always take into account the fact that,
like other subjective evaluations, they are
often differentially influenced by a number
of variables. These latter variables, which
in themselves are nof subjective indicators,
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

292

have been found to be highly related to
subjective evaluations in general. For example, demographic, social, personality, and
situational variables, such as race, values,
alienation, and rising aspiration, have often
created problems for those trying to use
data from subjective ratings as Indicators
of objective reality. The interplay between
subjective and objective indicators represents a new area for research in social
accounting which would undertake the
investigation of the mechanisms involved in
the interrelations between subjective and
objective indicators. Although objective
indicators are distinct and different from
subjective ones in terms of both the nature
of the data which is utilized and the information which is provided, they are related to each other. The similarity to economics is striking, insofar as people’s
evaluation of the economy affects their
decision to buy (or sell), and thus influences, if only indirectly, the amount of
goods actually produced. So too it would be
reasonable to expect that a change in a
subjective indicator, such as health, might
influence the policy-makers to change government policy toward health, and thus
change the level of health in the country.

In addition to research on the interrelations between objective and subjective
indicators, profitable investigation could
properly be conducted on the “disaggregating” of data. Keeping with the usual
terminology of design and statistical analysis, this would be equivalent to the introduction of classificatory or independent
variables to either objective or subjective
indicators. For example, in the case of an
objective indicator such as infant mortality,
it would be of interest to compare states
with a high proportion of nonwhites to
those with a low per cent. Such a comparison could of course include as covariates
other variables, such as degree of urbanization or population density. In the case of

 

Gitter and Mostofsky

 

Social Biology

subjective indicators, the question of interest might focus on how the various groups
differ in their ratings of a phenomenon. How
is social class, ethnicity, or age associated
with differences in evaluating the quality
of life? Similarly, one might ask how the
perception of the quality of life of others
affects the evaluation of the quality of
one’s own life.

The “objective vs. subjective” issue has
been raised by others (E. B. Sheldon and
W.-M. Moore, 1968; Campbell, 1971). The
intent was to provide a substitute for “nonpsychological” and “psychological” respectively, with the former including measures
of income, housing, recreation, etc., and the
latter consisting of data such as aspirations,
frustration, etc. In contrast, the framework
presented in this paper regards both objective and subjective indicators as measures
of fhe same phenomenon, where the objective indicators are derived from factual
information, while the subjective ones are
derived from evaluative ratings by a sample
of respondents (Gitter and Lewis, 1971).
This scheme does not deny the existence of
“‘nsychological” variables (such as aspiration or frustration,) which may often
influence a person’s evaluation of his life,
though one would hardly consider such
information as interchangeable with the
person’s evaluations of his life; thus, such
variables cannot be considered subjective
indicators.

HIERARCHY OF IMPORTANCE

Social acounting devotes little attention
to the importance of the various aspects
of life. By implication, one might reasonably conclude that this problem has either
not been considered or that equal weights
have implicitly been assigned to each. It
is possible that one reason for this apparent
lack of attention is the fact that previous
research has been preoccupied with objective indicators, where assigning relative

 
—|
=
©
N
~
5
=
oO
O
oO
a
Co
©
=z
of
oN
=
—
CS
‘gf
oS
ON
os
oo
O
=
Ch
©
>>
—
—
N
mei
oO
>
os
c
-,
ra
O
vO
oO
ca
CS
©
—
c
5
©
a

Vol. 20, No. 3

weights to the various aspects would have
demanded rather arbitrary judgments on
the part of the investigator, which in turn
might have involved purely personal values.
We do, however, submit that a reasonable
strategy does in fact exist. “Relative importance,” denoting the weights for the
various aspects of life, may be derived from
ratings by a sample of respondents to
various aspects on an “Important” vs.
“Unimportant” scale (Gitter and Knoche,
1971). The ratings can then be used as
empirically derived weights for both
“HEW” and “non-HEW” type of indicators, and for both the objective or subjective
type of indicator. For example, the importance of health to the general public (or to
a particular segment of that public) vis-avis other “HEW” and “non-HEW” aspects
of life, would be of interest in aggregating
several indicators into a single index of
quality of life as a whole, as well as in
setting priorities for any policy which
affects more than one aspect of life.

The concept of relative importance of
the various aspects of life should not be
confused with the numerical values of either
objective or subjective indicators. Subjective and objective indicators of various
aspects of life tell us about the level of
quality of these various aspects; they do
not tell us about the relative importance
of a given aspect of life vis-a-vis other
aspects.

Assessing the importance of the various
aspects of life can answer some of the
following questions in the area of social
accounting: What is the relationship between fluctuations in importance ratings
and changes in either subjective or objective indicators? How are the important
ratings of “HEW” aspects of life associated
with their “non-HEW” counterparts? Do
high ratings of one or more aspects lead to
low ratings of the remaining ones? How
are the patterns of ratings of the various

Social Indicator

293

aspects related to such variables as social
class, race, and age? Answers to these
questions will provide a more empirically
oriented approach for assessing the quality
of life.

THE SOCIAL INDICATOR MODEL

The social indicator measurement model
as used in this paper begins with the assumption that a person’s life is composed of
phenomena which are the elements of his
everyday existence at a given point in time,
designated in Figure 1 as Time, in which
each time slice is a plate (1 to ”) and each
phenomenon or event is a dot (1 to &),
which we designate as ‘“‘elements.” Some of
these elements are related to other elements
in this time period as well as to elements in
other plates. Certain elements are common
to a number of plates; that is, certain
phenomena in the everyday life of a person
are common to a number of points in time.

Plate #1 represents the elements at
Time; in the everyday life of the first
person in our hypothetical population. To
show the elements in the life of the other
people who make up the population would
require as many figures as there are persons
in the population, with each figure having
separate plates representing Time, through
Timen. Some of the elements (Set A) in
the first person’s life are shown within the
dotted line rectangle and make up that
portion of his life, at a given point in time,
which constitute the quality of his life.
The dots outside of the Set A represent
events in his life which do zot contribute
to the quality of his life.

On the basis of empirical evidence (Gitter
and Franklin, 1971), we have further been
able to further subdivide Set A into sixteen
categories designated as Sets A; through
Ayg. The sixteen, shown within wavy lines
of the figure, may be verbally described
as follows:

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

294.

Gitter and Mostofsky

ELEMENT 1

    
  

SET 8 SET A
@ @ e e rr ~~
oe @ 6 e { = *

SET B, (ss &

oe SH TD
: i
: \<

 

Social Biology

OVERLAP OF
A, & A;

Leisure &
SET A, (rete,

SET A, {Educational
Attainment

OVERLAP OF

~~”

Recreation

SET B
Educational

Attainment

ne

SET 8,,/ International

Conflict

Ne”

nternational

|
Conflict
ELEMENT K of i

2

PLATE 1 TIME,
PLATE 2 TIME,

PLATE 3TIME,

PLATE n TIME,

Fic. 1—Schematic representation of events describing the life encounters of a single person. A
similar figure would be prepared for each individual in a population.

1,

2.
3

oe

com

Availability and utilization of leisure
time recreation
Educational attainment

. Enjoyment of art (music, sculpture,
dance, etc.)

. Finding fulfillment and = satisfaction
with work and life

. Getting along with people in general
Getting along with people who are
close to you

. Health

. Income

9. Living and working physical environ
ment

10.
11.

12.

13.
14,

15.
16.

Morality: values and conduct in dealing with others

Opportunity and ability to “get
ahead” or advance oneself through
education and work

Opportunities for involvement in community, state, and national affairs
Personal physical appearance

Rights: free speech, assembly, privacy, equality before the law, etc.
Safety of self and property from
crime

Safety of self and property from international conflict.

 
 

Vol. 20, No. 3
The above sixteen categories (listed in
alphabetical order) represent both the
“HEW” and “non-HEW” aspects of life.
Specifically, categories no. 2, 7-9, 11-12,
and 15 closely resemble the seven “HEW”
aspects of life, while the remaining nine
categories represent the “non-HEW” aspects of life in the model. From the point
of view of the model, these sixteen aspects
of the quality of life are meant to be an
exhaustive set of categories or elements in
Set A. There is, however, no implication
Sithat they are also necessarily mutually
8 exclusive. In other words, it is possible
5 that some elements in the first person’s
2Set A are common to more than one cate20 gory, and thus contribute to more than one
= aspect of his life. Such a hypothetical con‘dition (the overlap of A; and Ag) is de= picted as the shaded portion. While Set A
rctefers to “point-at-able”’ or output reEssponses, Set B represents other elements
‘Sin the life space which may modulate or
= otherwise affect parametric changes in the
S output. These will be discussed later.

CONSTRUCTING SOCIAL INDICATORS

[University of

To derive an indicator (objective or sub> jective) of the quality of life (either as a
5 whole or one of its aspects), the researcher
oO °

3 must devise a scale (s) to measure the
< particular phenomenon. For example, let
3 us assume that the researcher is asked to:

a

1. Construct an objective indicator of

health.

a. Use “incidence of cancer per
100,000 adults (21 and over)”
as the indicator.

b. Use the period of time designated
as Time, (Fig. 1) as the unit
of time, which the derived social
indicator of health value is supposed to depict.

2. Construct a parallel subjective
cator.

a. Use ratings on a “Very Low” vs.
‘Very High” scale.

indi
In our example, the researcher would

Social Indicator

295

scan all of the Plates #1 (Time,) of all
Figures (corresponding to all the persons
in the population) to measure the frequency
of cancer. He may determine his estimate
of cancer by scanning A7 in each Plate #1,
since in our model Az corresponds to the
subset of Set A which includes all of the
elements relating to the health-related
phenomena. Since the researcher wants to
measure the incidence of cancer only among
the adults, he will count the incidence of
cancer only from Plates #1 of those persons
who are 21 years or older.

The word “scanning” had been used as
if the researcher has actually constructed
a number of Plates #1 (a number equal to
the number of adults in the population
during Time,) from which he can determine
the exact number of persons who had
cancer during that period. While such a
procedure is illustrative of the theoretical
workings of the model, it will not be the one
used by the data collector. It is more probable that the counting of the incidence of
cancer among adults during Time; (by
examining hospital and other records, or
by consulting records of a government
agency which gathers incidence of cancer
data) will be more efficient.

To construct a parallel subjective indicator, our researcher would collect from a
representative sample of the public their
evaluations of the incidence of cancer.
Specifically, each respondent would be
asked: “Where on the accompanying 0 to
100 scale (with 0 representing “The number
of people with cancer is very low” and 100
representing “The number of people with
cancer is very high”) would you put the
number of people who had cancer during
the last year?”’* The subjective indicator of
health value would be derived by computing the median of the distribution of the
obtained ratings.

2“Tast year” is used in the term as a hypothetical Time, period.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

Gitter and

296

The above procedures for deriving the
objective and subjective indicator of health
values for Time; are presented not as a
definitive prescription of what the researcher must do, but rather as a tentative
schema for carrying out his tasks in the
context of our model. Obviously variations
in procedures are possible, and further
details are needed—for example, the specification as to what “government agency”
records will be used—before an actual study
could begin. In addition, no mention was
made of any possible analysis that our researcher could perform, using either the
objective or subjective indicator data. For
example, in the case of the objective indicator, we could compare differences in health
(as measured by the incidence of cancer)
associated with sex, age, or race differences.
Similarly, the influence of sex, age, race, or
other variables could be tested, using the
subjective indicator of health data as the
dependent variable. However, as mentioned
before, our aim is to suggest how social
indicator research could proceed using the
model, rather than to present an exhaustive
list of all possible considerations for design,
data collection, and analysis.

In addition, it should be mentioned that
a desire for simplicity in our illustrative
example is responsible for the notion of constructing an objective social indicator of
health by means of computing the incidence
of cancer. Probably, rather than relying on
data from a single variable, any serious
attempt to construct an objective indicator
of health would involve computing an aggregate index derived from a number of
health-related variables. In such a case, the
item used for deriving the subjective indicator of health would change, with the
questions asked of respondents becoming
more general, such as for example: “Using
the accompanying O to 100 scale (with 0
representing “Very low” and 100 representing “Very high”) how would you rate the
state of health in this country?”

Mostofsky Social Biology

INPUT VS OUTPUT

At any given point in time, the set of
elements in the first person’s life which
constitutes the quality of his life at that
time is designated in the model as output
variables. The term “output” denotes that
they are the consequence of, or the effect of,
certain antecedent events or variables, which
we may call input variables. To make the
model complete, the input variables have to
be incorporated. These are shown as Set B
in Figure 1 (the oval enclosed by the zigzag
line), which at some future point in time
will influence the level of output variable.
In other words, they will influence future
elements (dots in Set(s) A on “future”
Plates in Figure(s) 1 through 7) in the life
of the first person, or any other person in
the population. .

Some points should be noted concerning
the input variables. First, like the output
variables of Set A, the input variables can
be categorized, and sixteen input categories
(B, through Byg,) can be defined to correspond to the sixteen output ones. Second, as
with the output categories, there is a possibility for an overlap between two or more
input variable categories (such a hypothetical condition is depicted by the overlap
of B; and Bg). The rationale is the same
as with the output variables, that is, some
elements which are antecedent to some
future Set A element(s) in the life of the
first person and/or persons may be common
to more than one input variable category.
Third, the overlap of Set A and Set B denotes the condition where some of the elements in a person’s life which at a given
point in time belong to his Set A, that is,
the elements that constitute the quality of
his life, also belong to Set B, that is, they
may also be the antecedents to some future
set A in his life, and/or that of others.

The distinction between input and output
variables is important for, although changes
in input variables influence the levels of

 

 
nloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

5
°
A

 

 

Vol. 20, No. 3

output variables, it is the output variables
which make life what it is, and only output
variables (Set B) can be used as data to
reflect the quality of life. This implied prohibition against the use of input variables,
as data reflecting the quality of life, should
not imply that they are unimportant to
social accounting. For it is only through a
judicious manipulation of input variables
that we can hope to influence the output so
as to enhance the quality of life.

SUMMARY CHECKLIST

By way of summary, it may be useful to
list a number of points which could provide
a checklist for those involved with social
accounting.

A. Are only output variables used as data
in contrasting a given social indicator?

B. Is the social indicator an objective or
subjective one?

C. If the social indicator is one which purports to represent the level of quality of
life in the global sense, which of the
“HEW” and “non-HEW” aspects of life
are included?

D. In aggregating a number of aspects into

Social Indicator

297

a single indicator, what method is used
for weighting the various indicators?

E. Does the research being evaluated throw
light on any of the following?

1. The influence of input variables on
output ones, that is, on social indicators.

2. Relationships among subjective or
objective indicators of the various
aspects of life.

3. Relationships between subjective and
objective indicators.

4, Association between on one hand,
the importance of “HEW” and “nonHEW” aspects of life, and on the
other, their levels of quality.

5. The effects of demographic, social,
personality, and situational variables
on the patterning of subjective indicators and importance ratings of
various aspects of life.

Although this checklist does not exhaust
all of the important issues that should be
considered in the social indicator research,
it does make explicit a number of questions
that should be raised in its evaluation. Only
by critically addressing ourselves to such
questions can we profitably expect to increase the fruitfulness which the study of
quality of life offers.

REFERENCES

AMERICAN ACADEMY OF POLITICAL AND SOCIAL
ScreNcE. 1967. Social goals and indicators for
American society. The Annals, Vols. 371 and

372.
. Political intelligence for America’s future.
The Annals, Vol. 288.

BAvER, R. 1966. Social indicators M.I.T. Press,
Cambridge, Mass.

CAMPBELL, ANGUS. Social accounting in the 1970's.
Michigan Bus. Rev. 23:1-27.

D’AcosTiIno, RALPH B. 1971. Social indicators—a
statisticians’s view. Paper delivered at the Symposium on Social Indicators, American Psychological Association Meeting, September 6, 1971.

Grtter, A. G. and S. FranxkLin. 1971. Subjective
indicators of sixteen aspects of life. CRC Report No. 58. Boston University, Boston, Mass.

Gitter, A. G. and E, Knocur, 1971. Importance
ratings of sixteen aspects of life. CRC Report
No. 59. Boston University, Boston, Mass.

Gitter, A. G., and S$. Lewis. 1971. Toward a

 

social indicator of crime—a pilot study. CRC
Report No. 51. Boston University, Boston.

Gitter, A. G., and R. R. Peterson. 1970. Toward
a social indicator of education—a pilot study.
CRC Report No. 44. Boston University, Boston.

Gross, B. M. 1968. Social intelligence for America’s future. Allyn, Rockleigh, N.J.

Otson, M. 1969. Social reporting: Its history and
prospects. Paper presented at the American
Political Science Association Convention, September, 1969.

SAWCHUE, R., and A. G, GitTer. 1971. Eight subjective indicators. CRC Report No. 54. Boston
University, Boston.

SHELDON, E. B., and E. M. Moore, 1968. Indicators of social change: Concepts and measurements. Russell Sage Foundation, New York.

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, and
WELFARE. 1969. Toward a social report. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
