Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Symposium on genetic counseling in mental
retardation

To cite this article: (1970) Symposium on genetic counseling in mental retardation, Social
Biology, 17:1, 61-62, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1970.9987845

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1970.9987845

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lil Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:53

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Vol. 17, No. 1

of unprotected coitus, or the last act of
protected coitus in the neighborhood of
ovulation time, or the first act of unprotected coitus in the neighborhood of ovulation time. On the other hand, it might be the
beginning of the first intermenstrual interval
in which coitus is unprotected. Pill-users
may well differ from others in the way they
think about their beginning point. They
may start with the last day they took the
pill, or, since they tend to be somewhat
more sophisticated than others, they may
start with the time of ovulation in that
month (58% of pill-users were correct, but
only 48% of others, on a narrow definition
of the correct response to a question about
ovulation time). Since it is obvious that
many women don’t know their time of
ovulation, they will have trouble figuring
out how many months to say in answer to
the question of how long it takes to get
pregnant. Moreover, many women do not
know in which month they get pregnant and
may very well report the time when they
first learned that they were pregnant, or
perhaps the time of their first missed period.

Given this array of considerations, we see
no difficulty in defending our decision to
stick to a gross level of detail. The one exception which would be interesting as an
addition to our knowledge of the effects of
the pill would be whether the low probability of conception in the first month for
pill-users as against others reflects a continuing effect of the pill; regrettably, the

Communications

 

61

problems of coding, and even, for many
women, of defining the responses for this
particular interval remove even this possibility from our grasp.

Wolfers chooses to interpret the nuances
of month-by-month changes as meaningful
and proceeds to create a model, involving a
dichotomization of women into those who do
and those who do not have some characteristic. The only measure of the characteristic
proposed is the observed behavior. What
Wolfers has done, in effect, is to fit a model,
based on three or four parameters, to a set
of six points—roughly equivalent to fitting a
second or third degree polynomial to a set of
six points. Accordingly, it is scarcely surprising that he gets a good fit.

Those of us who have had many painful
years of experience with rough-and-ready
survey data, burning our fingers repeatedly
from over-interpretation of putative findings, are finally learning to approach the
output of such crude data-collection instruments with the due amount of skepticism.
It is easy to understand how a person from a
tradition of careful measurements made by
people who were highly trained for the task
(rather than by respondent, interviewer, and
coder, as in our case) would tend to give our
data more credit than they are really due.
The error was probably ours. We should not
even have published the 1, values month by
month, and we should have included a
longer statement on the pitfalls of our data.

Symposium on Genetic Counseling in

Mental Retardation

A symposium on Genetic Counseling in
Mental Retardation will be held during the
annual meetings of the American Association on Mental Deficiency which will be

held this year in conjunction with the annual
meetings of the American Academy on Mental Retardation at the Sheraton-Park Hotel
in Washington, D.C. The symposium will
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

62 Communications

be held in the Assembly Room of the hotel
on May 28 beginning at 2:00 p.m. with
Arnold R. Kaplan as Chairman.

The four invited speakers and their topics
are: William J. Meliman, “Genetic Mechanisms Concerned with Mental Retardation”; Cecil Jacobson, “Jn Utero Diagnoses
of Genetic Disorders’; Ernest McCoy,

Social Biology

“Postnatal Diagnosis, Early Recognition,
and Screening Programs”; and Ntinos C.
Myrianthopoulos, “The Current Status of
Genetic Counseling Programs.”

The formal presentations should be completed by 4:00 p.m. after which a discussion
period of approximately an hour will be
held.

 
