Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Variables in the outcome of genetic counseling

Ray M. Antley

To cite this article: Ray M. Antley (1976) Variables in the outcome of genetic counseling, Social
Biology, 23:2, 108-115, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1976.9988216

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988216

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

ee
(g Submit your article to this journal @
all Article views: 3

»
Q View related articles @

wa Citing articles: 14 View citing articles G@

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

 
Variables in the Outcome of
Genetic Counseling

 

Ray M. Antley

Departments of Medical Genetics and Pediatrics
School of Medicine

Indiana University

Indianapolis, Indiana

ABSTRACT: Genetic counseling is defined as a communication process which has as its goal the
provision of information and support for the alleviation of human suffering. Review of the
literature indicates that educational, reproductive, and psychological outcomes vary and that
reproductive behavior is dependent upon stage in the life cycle, the mother’s religion, and the
family’s attitude toward children. The degree of handicap of the affected, improvement with
treatment, recurrence risk, and mode of inheritance may be important determinants within
certain groups. Psychological outcome is harder to assess. Both clinical observations and objective measures have indicated a high degree of emotional upset in counselees at the time of genetic
counseling. Causes for this upset are hypothesized and related to the grief model. It is suggested
that these psychological variables have significant impact upon the learning, decision making,
and behavior of counselees. It is postulated that these affective effects are operating for periods of
three or more years after counseling. Thus, it is proposed that aspects of genetic counseling related

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

to adjustment be increased and lengthened.

In the evaluation of genetic counseling,
one needs to consider what genetic counseling is, who gets it, and who provides it.
In December of 1972, at a workshop sponsored by the National Genetics Foundation and the National Institutes of Health,
the following definition of genetic counseling was adopted.

Genetic counseling is the communication
process which has as its goal the alleviation
of human suffering associated with the occurrence, or the risk of occurrence, of a genetic disorder in a family. The counseling
tries to achieve this goal by helping the counselee: (1) comprehend the medical facts, including a diagnosis, probable course of the
disorder, and the available management;
(2) appreciate the way heredity contributes
to the disorder, and the risk of recurrence in
specified relatives; (3) understand the alternatives for dealing with the risk of recurrence; (4) choose the alternative which
seems appropriate to them in view of their
risk and their family goals, and act in accordance with that decision; (5) make a healthy
adjustment to the disorder in an affected

family member and/or to the risk of recurrence of that disorder.

This definition is broad. It encompasses
the long-term medical, psychological, and
sociological adaptations that accompany
the occurrence of a genetic disease in an
individual. The extended meaning of
genetic disease to the individual, to the
family, and to society implied tn this holistic definition calls for professionals other
than those with medical and genetic expertise.

The difference between the types of
helping skills implied by the definition of
genetic counseling and the training of professionals being called upon to provide
genetic counseling suggests many additional needs for other types of professionals who will emerge in this field of health
care. The results that I will review will
illustrate both complexities and  sensitivities involved in genetic counseling

108

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 23, No. 2

which are just beginning to be examined.
There is an implication from this preliminary data that the counseling skills used
by mental-health professionals are needed
in genetic counseling. Although who provides genetic counseling is important, who
gets it and where they get it directly influence the outcome. At present, the major
portion of genetic counseling is done in the
genetics clinic or in medical specialty
clinics such as cystic fibrosis, cardiology,
hematology, psychiatry, or neurology
clinics. The counseling in specialty clinics
is usually delivered as a part of general
medical care. This is an important consideration in trying to understand the reports
on the evaluation of genetic counseling.
For example, patients referred to medical
genetics clinics are as a rule more educated
and motivated to find out about their
genetic risks than the average patient who
comes to a specialty clinic for medical care
and for whom the genetics may be incidental or even unwanted. Another aspect of
the specialty clinic method of delivering
genetic counseling is that the genetic nature of the disease and the recurrence risk
may not come up for discussion. Thus, the
differences in counselors, counseling
strategies, the background of the counselee, and the reasons for counseling have
undoubtedly led to the variation in counseling results reviewed below.

The results of genetic counseling studies
are summarized according to the information counselees retain concerning the genetic aspects of their disease and how this
information and their general liabilities affect their reproductive behavior and emotional state.

RETENTION OF GENETIC
INFORMATION

Studies on the effects of genetic counseling have shown considerable variation in
the amount of content information which

Outcome of Genetic Counseling 109

counselees had retained at the time of the
follow-up interviews. In a follow-up study
of 455 couples at least three years after
counseling, Carter et al. (1971) reported
that, in general, most couples understood
and remembered the risk they had been
given. Fraser and Levy (1972) conducted a
similar follow-up on 130 families and
found that families remembered the recurrence risk, especially if it was low, but
their understanding of genetics was poor.
Emery et al. (1972) who examined the results of their counseling for Duchenne
muscular dystrophy, found 48 out of 53
women clearly understood the genetics.

Other studies, however, indicate that
the education of the counselees is not always so effective. Hsia et al. (1974) reported that over one-quarter of their
clients had misinformation or poor understanding of the information from counseling. Leonard et al. (1972) reported that
after genetic counseling only 0.69 parents
of children with cystic fibrosis, 0.86 parents of children with phenylketonuria, and
0.80 of parents of children with Down’s
syndrome knew their respective recurrence risks.

Assessment of the understanding of carrier state and genetic mechanisms indicated even less overall information. After
genetic counseling for congenital heart
disease, the results reported by Reiss and
Menashe (1972) were indicative of less retention than Leonard’s (1972). Interviews
taken four months after counseling
showed 18 out of 35 families who requested counseling for congenital heart
disease could not remember the name of
the child’s heart condition; 26 out of the 35
did not know the recurrence risk (Reiss
and Menashe, 1972).

The wide range of variation in these
results suggests that there are factors which
affect the interaction between counselor
and counselee in such a way that effective
learning of genetic information does not
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

110

always occur. Variation in the success of
counseling may result from differences in
the psychological stress, motivation, and
educational background of the counselee,
or from breakdown in doctor-patient
communication. Evidence from at least
| two studies (Fraser et al., 1972; Leonard et
'al., 1972) suggests that genetic information may be given too early during grieving to be retained. Thus, Fraser and Levy
(1972) reported that 25 per cent of their
families thought genetic counseling came
too early. Others have found that from 8
per cent (Leonard et al., 1972) to 15 per
cent (Antley and Hartlage, 1973) of their
families denied having had counseling at
all.

Leonard and associates (1972) reported
that recall of genetic information provided
during counseling was correlated with the
educational background of the counselees
and postulated a relationship between
motivation and learning to account for the
difference between their families and those
of Carter et al. (1971).

REPRODUCTIVE BEHAVIOR

The usefulness of genetic counseling in
helping couples with family planning decisions indicates that in some studies there is
good correspondence between genetic understanding and family planning, while in
others no significant relationship could be
demonstrated. The most impressive relationship emerges from examination of the
reproductive intentions and behavior of
women at high (greater than 10 per cent)
risk for having a child with Duchennes
muscular dystrophy. This result indicates
that 0.93 of women counseled were deterred from childbearing (Emery et al.,
1972). There have been no children born
to these 38 women. The Emery et al.
(1972) report indicates a high correlation
between genetic understanding and reproductive behavior.

Antley

Social Biology

Carter et al. (1971) reported 170 highrisk families of whom 0.65 intended no
further children. Eighteen families subsequently produced twenty children, five for
whom therapeutic abortion had been requested but denied (Table 1). These authors found that most couples were deterred from reproducing by a high risk for
children with a serious condition accompanied by long-term disability. Fraser and
Levy (1972) have reported similar results.

The Leonard et al. (1972) study showed
that 0.609 of their high-risk families were
deterred. However, there was a difference
between high-risk high-burden cystic fibrosis, with 0.692 deterred, and high-risk
low-burden phenylketonuria, with 0.166
deterred. Of the 28 high-risk families who
planned to stop childbearing, three families had an additional child.

The rate of unplanned children in the
three studies varies between 0 to 16 per
cent, and an appreciable portion of the
variance is due to the availability of abortion. In the literature, the undeterred
high-risk groups have produced approximately one child per family after counseling. All studies showed a relationship between attitudes toward child spacing (Table 1) and subsequent reproductive behavior. Leonard et al. (1972), in the only
study in which knowledge was quantified,
reported no statistically significant relationship between genetic understanding
and reproductive behavior; but variability
in reproductive behavior was related to
recurrence risk and burden of the specific
disease.

Three studies lend themselves in part to
evaluation of the effects of counseling offered by centers specializing in a specific
disease (Carter et al., 1971; Emery et al.,
1972; Leonard et al., 1972). Duchennes
muscular dystrophy, for example, has a
dismal outlook, and there has been no
fundamental improvement in the treatment of the progressive muscle degenera
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 2

Outcome of Genetic Counseling 111

TABLE 1
RELATIONSHIP OF GENETIC RISK, REPRODUCTIVE PLANS, AND SUBSEQUENT PREGNANCIES

Families with Children Born

No. of Families Birth Control to Undeterred
Study and Risk Families Deterred Failures Families
Carter, Evans,
Fraser-Roberts,
and Buck (1971)
High .............. 170 109 18* 74
64% 16%
LOW .. ccc cece ees 251 60 9 220
24% 16%
Leonard, Chase,
and Childs (1972)
igh... .......008, 46 3 21
61% 11%
LOW .... cee eee eee 15 1 1
20% 33%
Emery, Watt,
and Clark (1972)
High ...........04. 41 38 0 it
93% eae
LOW 2. cece eee een 12 5 0 4
42% eee

* In five families, abortions were sought but denied.
+ Parents had prenatal diagnosis.

tion. The recurrence risk is high for a
woman carrying this X-linked disease;
and she does not share the responsibility
for the greater risk with her mate since she
alone is the carrier. Eight of 8 and 38 of 40
women (Carter et al., 1971; Emery et al.,
1972) who had a greater than 10 per cent
chance of producing a child with Duchennes muscular dystrophy were reported to
have been deterred from further childbearing.

Results on cystic fibrosis, a severely debilitating disease with a 25 per cent recurrence risk in which the health and survival of affecteds has been improved by
antibiotics and respiratory toiletry are reported from two studies. Sixty-five per
cent of parents were deterred in both studies (Carter et al., 1971; Leonard et al.,
1972). The proportion deterred was similar in different countries and across differences in socioeconomic status of counselees.

Down’s syndrome, with moderate mental retardation and a | to 2 per cent recurrence risk was associated with about 20

per cent of the families ceasing childbearing (Carter et al., 1971; Leonard et al.,
1972). The proportion deterred was less
than the 25 of 29 deterred by a high risk of
recurrence from other forms of mental retardation (Carter et al., 1971). The number of cases from both of these studies is
small, but the results are consistent.

These results suggest that (1) the prognosis of the affecteds, and perhaps whether the outlook is improving, and (2) the
recurrence risk are important determinants in making a decision of whether to
have future children or not. In addition,
whether the genetic risk is shared by both
mates or belongs to a single parent
emerges as a potentially potent issue in
risk-taking.

In analyzing factors influencing reproduction after counseling, Leonard et al.
(1972) found that the stage in the mother’s
life cycle was important regardless of the
disease being considered. The number of
previous children and the mother’s age
were inversely correlated with having additional children. Mother’s religion was
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

112

not correlated with the decision to have
children, but was with actual reproductive
behavior. The families’ attitudes toward
children figured significantly in their decision (Leonard et al., 1972).

PSYCHOLOGICAL REACTIONS

A number of different models are applicable for facilitating the understanding of
the psychological reactions to genetic disease, one of which is the grief model. By
analogy, this model can be applied to all
human adaptation to change, and it is applicable to patient and family acceptance
of genetic diagnosis. In addition, it is a
popular model with which many people
are conversant, and analogies to death and
dying in genetic counseling can be followed. Therefore, this model will be used
in considering the counselees’ adaptations
to a genetic defect.

In general, the outlook of the genetic
counselee is that of a person who has suffered multiple losses or disappointments.
At stake is the anticipated health of self or
child. In addition, a person usually assumes that he or she carries a normal! set of
genes. Thus, a further loss or disappointment is the fact or implication that the
counselees’ genes are abnormal. The psychological reactions follow directly upon
the extent of the perceived loss, in relation
to the degree to which the person thinks he
needs that which has been ruined. The
amount of loss which the counselees perceive can be understood in terms of their
knowledge of the specific disease (their
perception of the prognosis, recurrence
risk, and stigmatization) as contrasted
with their life goals and the degree to
which such goals are felt to be threatened.
Psychological reactions do not emanate
from the loss alone, but occur in the context of the individual’s concept of self and
the constructs which he or she holds as
essential evidence for his or her personhood.

To illustrate more specifically some of

Antley

Social Biology

the underpinnings of these psychological
reactions, one can examine the implication
of being genetically defective in the context of a person’s and a family’s selfconcept. Clinical experience in genetic
counseling indicates that prior to the development of a medical diagnosis, most
counselees had not consciously considered
that they might carry any abnormal genes
and had taken for granted that all of their
genes were functional.

In addition, the belief in romantic love
and marriage in our society portends the
concept of an ideal family, or at least of a
normal family. Thus, for multiple reasons,
expectant parents often look upon their
children as self-enhancing extensions of
themselves: Rarely does a couple conceive
a child with the notion of taking a one-intwenty risk for a serious birth defect. In
essence, couples plan for an ideal family.

The disclosure of a genetic abnormality
is at variance with these prior expectations. With the diagnosis of a genetic disease, a new dimension to personal self and
family self has been actualized which may
be perceived as defective, and for which
no previous allowance in self and family
concept had existed. Out of the disappointment, a conflict emerges between
idealized self and family and perceived self
and family. The personal and family adjustment necessary to integrate and bring
back into equilibrium the ideal self and the
perceived self is the grief process.

The resolution of the disappointment or
conflict can be formalized in four phases.
They are: (1) shock, (2) denial, (3) emotional upset, struggling with the disturbing information, internal conflicts, and inconsistent patterns of behavior, and (4)
acceptance, with consistent and integrated
behavior. Although relatively few studies
on the psychological aspects of genetic
counseling have been reported, there is
ample evidence that denial, emotional upset, and conflicting behaviors are important problems.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 23, No. 2

As indicated above, shock and denial
are usually the first psychological reactions to the discovery of a genetic abnormality in an individual or his progeny.
This initial reaction can lessen the effectiveness of imparting genetic information.
Leonard et al. (1972) reported that 5 out of
61 of their counselees denied ever having
been counseled. An additional 6 denied
some aspect of their child’s disease such
that the usefulness of the genetic information was questioned by the evaluators.

Fraser and Levy (1972) reported 40 per
cent of their counselees had one or more
children after the birth of an affected
child. A similar percentage had waited
over two years before coming to counseling. During the interval between the birth
of the affected child and the parents coming to genetic counseling, 15 per cent had a
second child with a genetic defect. Denial
is an important psychological variable
which is perhaps delaying genetic counseling unduely, thus preventing couples from
receiving and using genetic information.

Denial is usually a temporary phase,
and as counselees begin to accept their
diagnosis and partially understand its
meaning, they experience significant
amounts of distress. Langsley (1961) has
reported his clinical experience of a family
with Alport’s syndrome in which a rather
complete spectrum of these reactions is described in various members of a single
family.

In addition to clinical observations of
emotional upset, psychological measures
have shown that counselees coming to the

Outcome of Genetic Counseling

113

genetics clinic because of a Down’s syndrome child were experiencing increased
anxiety, hostility, and depression (Table 2)
(Antley et al., 1972, 1973). The effect of
this upset in interfering with the success of
imparting genetic information is an important and unanswered question. Experience with students has indicated that some
degree of anxiety improves the performance of learners; however, anxiety which
is too high has a deleterious effect on

learning (McQuire, 1968).

Depression, unlike anxiety, can be expected to have a more consistent negative
effect upon learning; and a number of
mothers of Down’s syndrome children are
depressed at the time of counseling. The
mothers’ depression and its inhibitory effect on learning, measured in the case of
Down’s, would appear to be generalizable
to many other genetic diseases which
would place a high burden on the family.

As postulated earlier, the function of
denial is to enable the counselee to maintain some level of hope or sense of wellbeing in the face of what is perceived as
overwhelming disruption. Thus, the function of denial can be seen as a means of
controlling or perhaps of putting off emotional upset. If the information given at
genetic counseling is itself upsetting, then
it may evoke another phase of denial, and
further learning during counseling may be
blocked even more effectively than among
anxious students.

Self-concept is for many people at least
partially defined in terms of the common
assumption that they carry normal genes.

TABLE 2
PRECOUNSELING AFFECT IN DOWN’s PARENTS AND CONTROLS*

Down’s PARENTS

AFFECT Mothers
Anxiety............ 11.1 + 0.9 9
Hostility ........... 8.2 + 0.6 8
Depression ......... 15.5 + 1.6 15.
Self-concept ........ 203.3 + 6.4 210.

* Mean + standard error.

Fathers

wAIO

CONTROLS
Females Males
+ 1.0 6.0 + 0.7 §.8 + 0.8
+ 0.8 6.3 + 0.8 6.5 + 1.1
+ 1.3 10.6 + 1.2 11.44 1.)
+ 6.2 207.1 + 3.7 209.3 + 3.5
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

114

Because one of the tasks of genetic counseling is to replace this assumption of perfection with more realistic information,
the self-concept may suffer as a result of
genetic counseling. Another effect of defining self in terms of one’s genes may be
feelings of guilt and self-blame for the
genetic defect of one’s child. These feelings
were reported by one-half of the mothers
and one-third of the fathers counseled by
Fraser and Levy (1972).

This author has studied the effects of

_ genetic counseling on emotional upset

among parents of Down’s syndrome children (Antley et al., 1972, 1973). Measures
of anxiety, hostility, depression, and selfconcept were made immediately before
and after counseling for thirty parents.
Following counseling, there was significant lowering of anxiety and depression
along with significant increase in overall
self-concept (Antley et al., 1972). This latter finding suggests that, on the average,
counseling has not increased self-blame,
guilt, or hopelessness. Ideally, the increase
in self-concept and decrease in anxiety
should be related to parents feeling that
they were furnished some information
which they perceive as improving their
ability to cope.

No in-depth measure of the effects of
genetic diagnosis on concepts of physical
self, genetic self, and global self-worth
have been carried out. However, these
studies need to be done since guilt, selfblame, and redefinition of values are important issues after genetic diagnosis.

In addition to manifest anxiety, hostility, and depression, there is considerable
evidence of unresolved emotional upset
extending beyond the initial period of adjustment. For example, when behavior
continues to be inconsistent with stated
goals and values, one may assume the
presence of stress or even psychological
disturbance. Although all humans lack internal consistency at times, that consistency may be considered an indicator of

Antley

Social Biology

the level of psychological function. A high
degree of correspondence between stated
goals and observed behavior becomes a
goal of genetic counseling. However, the
data available indicate that some disparity
exists between the counselees’ stated goals
and their behavior.

The results of Leonard et al. (1972)
demonstrated that differences between
stated reproductive plans and behavior
are frequent. At the time of follow-up, a
number of families were using birth control methods that were inadequate to insure the accomplishment of their stated
childbearing plans. Approximately 25 per
cent of the families who claimed to have
been deterred from further reproduction
were using ineffective means of birth control. In addition, about one-half of the
families who had not made a decision at a
cognitive level were practicing ineffective
birth control. From this single study in
which data of this kind are available, 25
per cent of the families were not acting to
insure that their stated decision to prevent
a pregnancy be accomplished or that their
choice to make a conscious decision be
protected. Thus, even when families get
the genetic information and apparently
make a considered decision, they do not
always behave in a fashion consistent with
their plans. This finding is suggestive of
extended unresolved emotional conflict or
the lack of a clear decision.

In conclusion, these studies indicate:

1. There is a variation in what counselees recall after genetic counseling. The
reasons for the differences are somewhat
uncertain. However, the education, social
class, emotional state, and motivation of
the counselees are probably going to be
important variables. In addition, there is
meager evidence that a clinic specializing
in one disease, such as PKU or Duchennes
muscular dystrophy, with a single counselor, results in a better understanding of
genetics by the counselee.

2. Reproductive behavior is best preDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 2

dicted by reproductive plans. Such plans
are based upon number of previous children, recurrence risk, burden, and desire
for children.

3. Psychological reactions, including
denial, anxiety, hostility, depression, and
guilt, have begun to be studied. They are
potentially important dimensions to counseling because of their interference with
learning and decision-making. In addition, preliminary studies on parents of
Down’s syndrome children indicate that
counseling can aid in the resolution of
counselees’ emotional upset.

4. Psychological reactions, as indicated
by unresolved conflicts between reproductive plans and behavior, extend for periods of three or more years after genetic
counseling. This fact implies that if the

Outcome of Genetic Counseling

115

goals of genetic counseling are to be met,
i.e., to facilitate the total life adjustment,
more counseling services are needed. They
will often require more than one or two
visits, and the services offered by the
geneticist may be augmented by the inclusion of persons skilled in marital counseling and psychological counseling.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Publication No. 75-49 from the Department
of Medical Genetics, Indiana University, supported in part by the Indiana University
Human Genetics Center, PHS GM-21054, National Institutes of Health Grant (HEW MCHS
924), and grants from The Little Red Door,
Inc. and the Riley Memorial Association. This
paper was presented at a conference on Genetic
Counseling in Psychiatric Disorders: The State
of the Science and the Art, May 17, 1973, at the
University of Indiana, Indianapolis.

REFERENCES

ANTLEY, M. A., R. M. ANTLEY, and L. C.
HARTLAGE. 1973. Effects of genetic counseling on
parental self-concepts. J. Psychol. 83: 335-338.

ANTLEY, Ray M., and LAWRENCE C. HARTLAGE.
1973. The effects of genetic counseling for Down’s
syndrome. Pediat. Res. 7: 345.

ANTLEY, Ray M., and LAWRENCE C. HARTLAGE.
1973. Sickle cell trait: An instrument for measurement of counselees’ understanding. Pediat. Res. 7:
345.

ANTLEY, Ray M., LAWRENCE C. HARTLAGE, and
C. A. Kopitzke. 1972. Factors related to seeking
and responding to genetic counseling. Amer. J.
Hum. Genet. 24 (October): 27a.

CarRTER, C., K. EVANS, J. A. FRASER-ROBERTS, and
A. Buck. 1971. Genetic clinic: A follow-up. Lancet I (February): 281-285.

EmeErY, A. E. H., M. S. WATT, and E. R. Ciack.
1972. The effects of genetic counseling in
Duchennes muscular dystrophy. Clin. Genet. 3:
147-150.

FRASER, F. C., and E. P. Levy. 1972. Follow-up of
a genetic counseling program. Amer. J. Hum.
Genet. 24 (November): 30a.

Hsia, Y. E. 1974. Choosing my children’s genes:
Genetic counseling, p. 43-59. In M. Lipkin, Jr.,
and P. T. Rowley (eds.), Genetic responsibility:
On choosing our children’s genes. Plenum Press,
New York.

LANGSLEY, DoNALD G. 1961. Psychology of a
doomed family. Amer. J. Psychother. 15: 531538.

LEONARD, CLAIRE O., GARY A. CHASE, and BARTON CHILDS. 1972. Genetic counseling: A consumer’s view. New Engl. J. Med. 287 (August
31): 433-439,

McQuir_E, W. J. 1968. The nature of attitudes and
attitude change. Jn G. Lindzey and E. Aaronson
(eds.), The handbook of social psychology. 2nd ed.
Addison Wesley, Reading, Mass.

REIss, J. A., and V. MENASHE. 1972. Genetic counseling and congenita] heart disease. J. Pediat. 80:
655-656.
