Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

How birth control affects births

Nathan Keyfitz

To cite this article: Nathan Keyfitz (1971) How birth control affects births, Social Biology, 18:2,
109-121, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1971.9987908

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1971.9987908

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB arr | ei
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 15
N
Q View related articles 4

wa Citing articles: 15 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:54

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

How Birth Control Affects Births

Nathan Keyfitz

Department of Demography
University of California
Berkeley, California

No one knows better than students of
population that scientific achievements
create problems. Biological research over the
past half century has enabled individuals to
live into and through reproduction who in
earlier regimes would have died in childhood. The consequence Is a large increase of
births and hence of people. The acceleration
of biology and medicine has been followed at
a surprisingly short interval by an acceleration of population, and this in turn threatens us with biological as well as other kinds
of catastrophe.

It is natural that medicine should interest
itself in rectifying this consequence of its
success, and doctors have been active in the
development and diffusion of the means of
birth control. That the fitting of loops and
the inducing of abortions have become widespread medical activities shows how the professional, legal, and moral framework can
adapt itself to changed objective requirements—in this instance runaway population.

Parallel to the medical research and diffusion now going into contraception are important developments in demographic theory. These center on the individual woman
as she proceeds through successive conceptions, abortions, and births; but their main
interest is not the individual. Demographers

 

are interested in populations, and the
mathematics applied shows that results for
populations can be very different from
those for individuals. A new field is growing
up, created in response to the needs of the
times by Ansley Coale, Louis Henry, Robert
Potter, Norman Ryder, Mindel Sheps,
Christopher Tietze, and others. Although
their work is highly technical, some at least
of it is translatable into words and simple
arithmetic.

Reduction of births may come by way of
abortion, an intervention between conception and birth, or by contraception which
prevents the new life before it starts. Some
societies have made abortion their principal
method of birth control, and most use it in
one degree or another when birth control
fails. Let us start this exposition by seeing
how abortion affects births.

BIRTHS AVERTED BY INDUCED ABORTION

An induced abortion of a pregnancy that
is proceeding to term prevents a birth. Do
1,000 induced abortions performed in a population prevent 1,000 births? The answer is
no, not even approximately. Here, as elsewhere, the logic of individuals becomes
grossly misleading when applied to populations.

109

 

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

110 Keyfitz

AN ARITHMETICAL EXAMPLE

Consider a couple that has just conceived
and then decides to have an abortion; they
might have the abortion in the second
month and be sterile for one further month,
a total time from conception of three
months. To calculate the effect of the abortion we need to consider what happens
after. Suppose that the couple is young and
fertile again and resumes intercourse without contraceptive protection. Then the expected number of months before the wife is
pregnant again is about five. The three
infertile months before and after the abortion, plus the five months to another pregnancy, eight months in all, have brought
the couple back to the same condition of just
having conceived that it was in when we
started our observation. The eight months
represent the time out from childbearing
due to one abortion. Only if this length of
time were sufficient to have a child would
one abortion prevent one birth in the population.

In fact, having a child takes much longer.
It requires the number of months without
protection until conception, say 5 once again,
plus the mean time to term, 9 months, plus
the postpartum sterile period, which may
be as much as another 8 months, or 22
months in all. Only at the end of this 22
months is the woman back in the same condition as at the start of the cycle and susceptible to intercourse again.

On this model, childbearing is a matter of
time. The eight months accounted for by
the abortion are seen as having kept the
woman out of exposure for a little more than
one third of the 22 months that it would
have taken her to have a child. Put the
other way, the 22 months would have produced one child without the abortion; to
prevent childbearing during that period by
means of abortions alone would have required 22/8 = 2.75 abortions.

Hence, the answer to the question of how
many births 1,000 abortions in a population

Social Biology

prevent is in this example 1,000 X 8/22 =
364. Similar arithmetic shows that if the
abortion were delayed until the fetus was
four or five months old it would keep the
woman out of childbearing longer. However,
even abortions taking place just before
natural birth are not equivalent to births
prevented insofar as the succeeding infertile
period is less than after a birth.

If on the other hand our model had admitted possible pregnancy terminated by
miscarriage, the average time between successive normal births would have been even
longer, and the effect of the induced abortion would have been accordingly further
reduced. Moreover, the abortion of a conception that was destined to end up as a
stillbirth would not have prevented a birth
at all, but could even have brought the succeeding pregnancy closer. Far from reducing
births, the abortion in this case would on the
average have added a fraction of a birth.

The issues here are of general enough application that they have been the subject
of a more precise formal model.

THE THEORETICAL ANALYSIS

The model is a renewal process, one that
repeatedly reverts to the same situation.
Think of a just-married couple: They start
intercourse, say without contraception; then
they have a pregnancy, childbirth, postpartum anovulatory period, and at the end of
the cycle they are in the same condition as
when they began. They are ready to start
over. This is the meaning of ‘‘renewal” in
this context. Our analysis will be confined to
expected values, though a similar argument
could tell us about variances or other moments as well. In effect, we will be comparing the renewal process of intercourse, pregnancy, childbearing, intercourse, ..., with
the renewal process of intercourse, pregnancy, abortion, intercourse,.... We will
disregard miscarriage and stillbirth and
take account only of conceptions leading to
live births. Time will be measured in ovulaDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

Vol. 18, No. 2

tions, and we will suppose these to be one
month apart.

First, to find the mean time to conception: Suppose that month by month the
chance of conceiving is p for a woman in the
fertile condition. Then among a number of
couples the fraction p will be expected to
conceive in the first month, and 1 — » will
proceed into the second month. Of these, p
will then become pregnant, or (1 — »)p of
the original women will become pregnant in
the second month. Similarly, the fraction
(1 — )*p will become pregnant in the third
month, etc.

To check that the probabilities add to unity, which they should do if all cases are covered, we write gfor 1 — p,sothat p = 1 — g,
and the sum for all months is

p+(l—p)ptd— ppt...

=1-qtqi-g+PUd—g+....

Removing the parentheses here gives
t-q+tq-Pte-GFr...,

and all terms but the first cancel. This
proves that p, (1 — p)p, (1 — p)*p,..., is
an honest probability distribution.

The expected number of ovulations until
pregnancy occurs will be found by multiply..., and adding:

p+ 21 — p)p +31 — p+...

To sum this expression we write p = 1 —
g and have

1—q+2%¢1—g +371 —g) +...,
or on multiplying out in each term,
1—¢g+2¢—2¢+3¢ —3¢+...,
which is the same as the geometric series
li+tqt¢rt...,

whose total is 1/(1 — g) = 1/p. This is the
mean number of ovulations (or roughly of
months of exposure) if the probability of

conception in any month is .
The feature of a renewal process that

 

Birth Coutrol 11]

makes our task simple is its additivity. Suppose that the number of months of sterility
following the onset of pregnancy is also a
random variable, with mean value s. Then
the expected length of time from the start of
intercourse to the end of the sterile or nonsusceptible period is the sum of these two
mean values, (1/p) + s. This is not as obvious as it looks, but we need not stop to prove
it here. It follows from the general proposition that if we have to wait for one event,
and when that occurs we have to wait for
another, and each event follows its own random distribution, then the mean time to the
second event is the sum of the mean times
for the two events separately.

The same proposition applies to abortion,
which involves first the random time to
pregnancy and then the random time to performance of the abortion. We will find it
convenient to incorporate with the time to
abortion the length of the post-abortion
sterile period. Suppose these two add up toa
total non-susceptible period of random
length whose expected value is a. Then the
total length of the cycle is on the average
(1/p) + 4.

Now let us see how many births are prevented by abortions taking place at such
time after the onset of pregnancy that the
woman is infecund for an expected amonths.
Since the total length of the cycle involving
one abortion averages 1/p-+ a, and the
total length of the cycle involving one birth
averages 1/p + s, the number of the former
that would fit into the latter is (1/p + s)/
(1/p + a). This is the number of abortion
cycles required to fill the time that would be
taken by one birth cycle. It is therefore the
number of abortions that would prevent one
birth, and its reciprocal is the fraction of a
birth prevented by one abortion. If p =
0.2,s = 17, anda = 3, we have 8/22 births
prevented by one abortion, as in thenumerical calculation that preceded this algebra.

The same result may be obtained by
thinking of two women with the same con
 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

112 Keyfitz

stant probability ~ of conception leading to
live birth in any month. The first of the
women carries all the conceptions to term,
and according to the above argument will
have a baby on the average every 1/p + 5
months. The other woman wants no children
and uses abortion as her sole method of contraception. She would have an abortion
every 1/p + @ months. Over any long period of time T the first woman would expect
to have T/(1/p+ 5) births; the second
woman would expect to have T/(1/p + a)
abortions. The second ratio divided by the
first, ie., (1/p + 5)/(1/p + a), again tells
us how many abortions are equivalent to
one birth.

ABORTION AS A BACKUP TO CONTRACEPTION

The constants in the above calculation
are about right for human populations that
do not use contraception. With contraception, the effect of abortion is very much
greater, a fact that may not be intuitively
obvious. We will see how it follows from the
above discussion.

To apply the argument to our new problem, we suppose that the efficiency of contraception is e. If e is 0.95, then instead of
the probability of conceiving in a particular
month being 0.2, as for unprotected fertile
couples, it is reduced to 0.2(1 — 0.95) or
about 0.01. More generally, in place of » we
write p(1 — e) as the probability of conceiving in a particular month. So much for
the definition of efficiency of contraception.

Now we go through the whole of the preceding argument again, this time with
p(l— e) instead of ». Nothing else is
changed: The mean length of time to pregnancy for fertile couples becomes 1/p(1 —
e), and the number of abortions that would
prevent one birth is now

1
p(i — e) ee
ar
pie *?

Social Biology

Entering p = 0.2, e = 0.95, s = 17 months,
and a = 3 months gives

(1/0.01 + 17)/(1/0.01 + 3) = 1.14

abortions to prevent one birth.

This is a very different outcome from the
no-contraception case. With unprotected
intercourse it takes nearly three abortions to
prevent one birth. With 95% efficient contraception it takes only about one and one
seventh abortions to prevent one birth. If
the efficiency of contraception was higher
than 0.95, an abortion would be even more
effective.

LIMITATIONS OF THE DETERMINISTIC MODEL

The argument by which we have found
how many abortions in a population are required to avert one birth is deterministic.
We compared two women going through
repeated cycles, one involving births and
the other involving abortions, but without
allowing for variation in the length of cycle.
We also disregarded variation in fecundability among women. If # is not constant
from woman to woman, the resulting expression for births averted has additional
terms. The complexities offered by the real
world can be met by making the mathematics more elaborate; the art of modelbuilding is to stop the elaboration once the
model is realistic enough to draw practical
conclusions,

Some kinds of complexity can be defined
out of the model. Stillbirths, for example,
have been eliminated in what precedes by
the device of considering only those conceptions that lead to live births.

BIRTHS AVERTED BY CONTRACEPTION

A similar logic serves to establish the effect of contraception. How many births are
averted by the insertion of a loop or by
giving a woman a supply of pills? Again let
us confine ourselves to conceptions leading
to live births, of which the probability in

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 18, No. 2

any month is taken as p, Again we require
the proposition proved above that the expected time to conception is 1/p months.

CONTRACEPTION BY ONE METHOD
CONTINUING INDEFINITELY

The couple who use a contraceptive of
efficiency e have a probability of conceiving
in any month of p* = p(1 — e). With the
same sterile period after conception of s
months they will expect a child once in
1/p* +s = 1/p(1 — e) + 5 months, while
an unprotected couple would expect a child
each i/p ++ s months.

This formula tells us that inefficient contraception cannot reduce the birth rate very
much. One might think that contraception
of 50% efficiency would lower the birth rate
by half, but its effect is much less. On the
present model, with the constants used before, a birth would take place every 1/0.2 +
17 = 22 months without contraception.
With 50% efficient contraception a birth
would take place every 1/(0.2)(1 — 0.5) +
17 = 27 months. Contraception of 50% efficiency has reduced the birth rate from 1/22
to 1/27, a reduction of only 19%.

FREQUENCY OF INTERCOURSE

The same model also tells us that childbearing 1s by no means proportional to frequency of sexual intercourse. To see this,
suppose that a woman is fertile one day out
of 30, and that she has intercourse ten times
per month on occasions that are random in
relation to susceptibility. Then the probability of conception is 10/30 in any particular month and the expected time to conception 3 months. If the infertile period
totals 17 months, then she would have a
child every 20 months; the monthly birth
rate of such women would be 1/20.

Suppose now that she reduces her frequency of intercourse to five times per
month. If the occasions are still random,
then the probability in any month is reduced
to 1/6, and the expected exposure time is
increased to 6 months. She will have a baby

 

 

Birth Control 113

on the average every 6 + 17 = 23 months,
that is, a monthly birth rate of 1/23. By
reducing intercourse 50%, from 10 to 5
times per month, people reduce their birth
rate from 1/20 to 1/23, or only 13% on our
assumption. Restraint with random time of
intercourse is not an effective way of holding
down births. We revert to contraception.

To assess the consequence of one fitting
of a loop or one provision of a stock of pills
to a woman who has patronized a birth control clinic, it would be extreme optimism to
assume that the loop will stay in place indefinitely or the pills be used forever. Plentiful data now exist on discontinuance rates,
and we need to elaborate our model to take
these into account.

DISCONTINUANCE OF CONTRACEPTION

Let the probability of discontinuing the
use of the contraceptive for a reason other
than pregnancy be d in any month if pregnancy is not considered, and suppose again
that among users during a fecundable month
p* = p(i — e) accidentally conceive. Then
an expected d* = d(i — p*) drop the contraceptive at the end of the month while
still susceptible, and 1 — p* — d* continue
its use into the following month.

Now the probability of pregnancy by an
accident during the use of the contraceptive
is
p* + (1 — p* — d*)p*

* *\2 p* — _ pr
+ (1 — p* — d*)*p +. =
The probability of dropping the contraceptive is exactly the same series, but with d*
rather than ~* at the end of each term.

Thus, we have
d* + (1 — p* — d*)d*
a*
— A*®  A¥\27* je er
+(1— >» d*)*d* +... pea

If we suppose the process to continue until pregnancy occurs, before or after dropping the contraceptive, then the probability
that it occurs after is also d*/(p* + d*).

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

114 Key fitz

The ratio of the probability of conceiving
while wearing the loop, say, is to the probability of conceiving after discontinuance
as p* is to d*.

To obtain the probabilities month by
month for those who are destined to become
pregnant while wearing the contraceptive,
we divide the unconditional probability of
becoming pregnant in each month by p*/
(p* + d*), Among these women p*/(p*/
(p* + d*)) would become pregnant in the
first month, (1 — p* — d*)p*/(p*/(p* +
d*)) in the second month, etc. Cancelling in
these ratios, we find * + d* for the first
month, (1 — p* — d*) (p* + d*) for the
second month, etc. Hence, for these women,
the mean length of exposure is

+21 — pt —a*\(p* +a) +...

which works out to

_ i
p* + a*’

using the same argument that summed
pt2— ppt... to give us 1/p.
Similarly, the distribution to discontinuance by that fraction d*/(d* + p*) who are
destined to discontinue before they become
pregnant is the same, and the mean exposure to discontinuance is again 1/(p* + d*).
This agreement of the two distributions
is by no means obvious. It is at first contraintuitive, and we should try to reorganize
our intuition to conform to the algebra.
Think again of a group of nonpregnant
women subject to a chance p* of pregnancy
in any month, as well as to a chance d* of
dropping the contraceptive. Now in any
month, out of W women whoare still neither
pregnant nor discontinued, the number who
are expected to discontinue at some future
time before becoming pregnant is Wd*/
(p* + d*), and the number who are expected to become pregnant while wearing
the contraceptive is Wp*/(p* + d*). The
number who are expected to discontinue in

Social Biology

this month is Wd*. As a fraction of all the
women, they are d*, of course; but as a fraction of the Wd*/(p* + d*) women who are
expected to discontinue they are

Wd*
Wa*/(p* + d*) 
Cancelling in this fraction gives p* + d* as
the probability of discontinuing in any particular month for those destined to discontinue at some time before they become
pregnant. The same argument shows that
the probability of becoming pregnant in a
particular month for any women destined to
become pregnant while using the contraceptive is the same, p* + d*.

This argument proves that the two conditional distributions are the same, and therefore the mean number of months must be
the same for those discontinuing as for
those becoming pregnant while wearing the
contraceptive.

EFFECT OF CONTRACEPTION AS AGAINST
NATURAL FERTILITY
Suppose the d*/(p* + d*) individuals
who drop out through discontinuance of the
contraceptive use no contraceptive afterwards. They will have a further period of
exposure while they are unprotected, and
this will average 1/p months. Hence the
time to conception is the time with the contraceptive for everybody, 1/(p* + d*), and
for the fraction d*/(p* + d*) who discontinue is an additional 1/p. The mean exposure time to conception averaged over all the
women in our hypothetical population is

*.—! d* (1
C= pget tes)
_ _1+ @*/P)

pie +a

This simple and fundamental formula,
due to Potter (1970) enables us to find the
effect in births averted of a segment of contraception, for example, fitting a loop to a
woman. If we know the three quantities,

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 18, No. 2

p, e, and d* of the expression for mean exposure, then we can calculate the mean months
of intercourse until conception occurs. This
is to be contrasted with 1/p, the mean
months of intercourse without contraception, and the difference is the effect of the
contraception.

For the interval between successive
births, we add to the expressions for exposure to intercourse the mean sterile period
associated with pregnancy, say s as before,
including the time both before and after the
birth. The expected interbirth period associated with contraception is then /* +s.
Thus, one birth takes place under contraception (including an allowance for dropping the contraceptive) every /* ++ s months.
If there were no contraception, one birth
would take place every 1/p + s months, and
the expected number of births without contraception during the /* -+- s months would
be (¢* + s)/(1/p +s). Hence, the births
averted by the segment of contraception
must number this quantity less the one that
did take place:

 

 

pi
i*¥ +5 p
1 |
are ra
p — p*

~ (LE ps) (p* + a*)°

The general method for finding births
averted by a segment of contraception is
thus to calculate the expected birth rate
with and without the segment and take the
ratio less unity. We can only find the effects
of some action by comparing what happens
if the action is taken with what would happen if the action were not taken. To say
what would happen with or without some
proposed action requires a model, and indeed no causal imputation can be made
without a model. The more realistic the
model the more precise and certain is the
imputation.

To continue with our simple example,
suppose that » = 0.2, s = 17, and (as an

Birth Control

 

115

approximation for the IUD) »* = (0.05)
(0.2) = 0.01, d* = 0.03. Then in the absence of contraception a birth would take
place every 1/p + s = 5+ 17 = 22 months.
With the IUD, ¢* would be 28.75, and a
birth would take place every é* +5 =
45.75 months. Hence, the births averted by
the segment of the IUD are 45.75/22 — 1
== 1.08, supposing it to be replaced by no
contraception after it falls out.

WHEN MODERN CONTRACEPTION TAKES THE
PLACE OF PRE-MODERN

One direction of realism in the model is
recognition that many of those who are fitted with a modern means like the loop have
already been using contraception of lower
efficiency. The number of births averted
that can properly be credited to the loop is
only the difference resulting from the superiority of the loop over the method used
previously; it would be quite improper to
credit the loop with all the births averted
through its use, as calculated above, where
no other method was taken into account.

By a simple alteration of the meaning of
the preceding symbols, we can deal with the
the case where the modern contraceptive
does not replace natural fertility, but supplants some other less efficient method already in use. Suppose that when the modern
method is discontinued—the loop falls out,
for instance—the couple goes back to the
earlier method. All that is needed to make
the above argument apply is to redefine 9,
making it refer now not to natural fertility,
but to the probability of conception in any
given month under the earlier method of
contraception.

If the alternative to which a woman falls
back on discontinuance is 90% efficient, the
p would become (0.2) (1 — 0.9) = 0.02, and
1/p+s is 50+ 17 = 67. Then é* is now
(1 + d*/p)/(d* + p*) = (1 + 0.03/0.02)/
(0.04) = 62.5, and i*+ s is 79.5. Births
averted by the segment of contraception in
this situation are (79.5/67) — 1 = 0.19.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

116 Keyfitz

The calculation of births averted by contraception is important enough to be worth
summarizing in a table for our two cases
(see Table 1).

The contribution of a fitting of a loop toa
birth-control program is less than one-fifth
as great if the alternative is 90% efficient
contraception than if it is natural fertility.

DELAY IN EXPOSURE

Often a loop is fitted just after a child is
born. It is an administrative convenience
that the woman is already present in the
hospital, and after having a baby she is
likely to be receptive to birth control. For
the months of postpartum sterility, the loop
cannot affect the chance of childbearing, and
on the other hand it is subject to the risk of
accidental or deliberate removal. If this risk
is d per month in the absence of pregnancy,
and the woman has A months to go before
she becomes fertile again, then the chance
that the contraceptive will begin to work as
assumed in the above model is (1 — d)*.

The argument needs to be broken down
for (1) the conditional probability if the
loop stays in place A months, and (2) the
conditional probability if it is discontinued.
If the loop stays in place A months, then the
subsequent expected exposure time is /*; and
if it does not, the subsequent expected exposure time is 1/p. Hence, the unconditional
expected exposure time is

= (1— drt +(1— (1 — aA4)(1/9),
TABLE 1

CALCULATION OF BIRTHS AVERTED
BY CONTRACEPTION

Loop SUPERIMPOSED ON

Natural 90%-Efficient
VARIABLES Fertility Contraception
sce e ete eee te eeees 0.2 0.02
pt=p(i—e)......... 0.01 0.01
D* ccc ee eee 0.03 0.03
So ccccceccucneeaaee 17 17
_A*
a 1.08 0.19
(1+ps)(p*+d*)

Social Biology

where we start counting at the beginning of
the fertile period, Now births averted would
be a smaller quantity than before:

 

 

tuts
Births averted given A = — 1
I.
p
1
i* — —
_- +
i .
+5
p

This is a smaller quantity because ¢{ is a
decreasing function of A, so that for positive
A the births averted will also be a decreasing
function of A. Intuition must be in accord:
Loops inserted in temporarily sterile women
cannot make as much difference to the birth
rate as loops in fertile women.

These considerations pose an operationsresearch type of problem for the familyplanning administrator. He can more easily
arrange for loops to be fitted while women
are in hospital, but some of the loops will be
lost before they can come into effective use.
What part of his effort should go into this
immediate postpartum fitting, as against the
part that goes into other birth-control activities? If the woman leaves the hospital
unfitted, when should she be reminded to
return for fitting? The lactation period and
the temporary sterility associated with it is
a random variable, and one would aim to
come as close to the end as possible. The
optimum solution would compromise between the waste of loops inserted too early
and the risk of an unprotected fertile gap.

Again, what amount of effort should be
put into providing contraception to women
in their twenties, and what to those in the
thirties? We know that the dropout rate is
higher for younger women, so the expected
time they will wear the loop after its insertion is shorter. Yet they are more fertile,
and so while the loop is in place it prevents
more births. Aside from this, a birth prevented to a younger woman helps to lengthen

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

Vol. 18, No. 2

the generation, which, as we shall see later,
in itself lowers the annual rate of increase of
the population.

The large amount of data on costs and
effectiveness now being gathered ought to
provide a basis for rational decision of these
and other points.

A CONTRACEPTION BALANCE SHEET

The theory sketched here, along with
data now becoming available to provide the
constants, suggests an overall account of the
childbearing activities of a country. Starting
with the number of married couples of different ages and of different degrees of susceptibility, we can say how many children
would be produced if there were no contraception. From the actual number born before the advent of modern loops and pills we
can estimate the efficiency of older style
contraceptive methods. With estimates of
the number of loops fitted and pills provided, we can say what additional births are
being averted, using the above outlined theory. The balance sheet starts in effect with
the amount of intercourse, and accounts for
all of it, including the part that results in the
bearing of children.

With a target number of births set as acceptable at the end of 20 years, for example,
we can calculate what amount of further
modern birth control activity will be necessary, recognizing alternative routes to the
target.

OTHER EFFECTS OF BIRTH CONTROL
CHILDSPACING AND THE EFFICIENCY
OF CONTRACEPTION

Those advocating contraception have
argued that it would advance the welfare of
mothers by allowing them to space out their
children, and indeed “‘childspacing” was a
euphemism for contraception in the days
when mention of the direct term was injudicious. Today we observe in groups using
contraception a tendency to concentrate
children within a few years of the mother’s

Birth Control 117

reproductive life. The interchild interval
seems to go down as the efficiency of contraception goes up, so that if we needed a euphemism for contraception today, childconcentration would be more appropriate
than childspacing. The reason is a further
aspect of the mathematics of birth control.

To present a simplified case, suppose
that a couple want no more than two children, that they command a technology of
birth control that is 95% efficient, and they
have a reproductive life of 25 years. They
would have a probability of conceiving in
any month of (0.2)(1 — 0.95) = 0.01 with
their 95%-efficient contraceptive, and over
the 25 years they would have an expected
24 pregnancies.! The couple could not afford
to let up for any part of their fecund life;
using contraception for each of the 300
months they would have over two children
on the average, and these would appear at
random intervals spread through the 25
years.

At the other extreme, a couple that command a sure method of contraception can go
ahead and have two or three children early
in their married lives, or at any juncture
they find convenient, with complete confidence that they could then stop. Not needing to allow for accidental pregnancies, they
can enjoy the advantages of having their
children in a clump. These advantages include especially the economies in the mother’s time—she has to stay home whether she
is looking after one child or three—and the
companionship that the children provide for
one another. If the mother is tied up until
her youngest is aged 10, then having three
children at 10-year intervals takes 30 years;
having them at 2-year intervals takes 14
years. In the latter case, childbearing interrupts her career for only half as long as in
the former.

1 The individual couple would be in the unhappy
condition of having anywhere from zero to over six
children; but let us confine this argument to expect
ed values. Once again, only pregnancies leading to
live births are taken into account.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

118 Key fitz

A very high efficiency of contraception is
necessary for the couple to concentrate
their children with confidence; even 99%
efficiency is not good enough. For with 99%
efficiency, the chance of bearing in a particular month with p = 0.2 is (0.02) (1—
0.99) = 0.002. The couple who marry
young, have all three children in a clump,
and then have twenty years of fertile life remaining must realize that their chance of
avoiding a fourth pregnancy over 240
months is 0.998740 = 0.618. The chance is
almost 40% that they will bear an unwanted
child with a contraceptive of 99% efficiency.

When contraception of 0.999 efficiency is
attained, then the chance of the unwanted
child in the same circumstances is reduced
to 1 — 0.999840 == 0.047, that is, 5% or one
in twenty. At about this point in the technology of contraception couples can fully
accept the advantage of concentrating their
children and disregard the risk of unwanted
pregnancies. Before this point they may in
some degree concentrate their children, but
prudence requires deferring one wanted
child as an allowance for accidents.

PREFERENCE FOR BOYS

With the advent of the perfect contraceptive, most of the problems dealt with above
will disappear. The perfect contraceptive
would be 100% efficient, so no one would
have to allow for accidental pregnancy; not
only would it always work, but it would be
so simple and automatic that no one could
forget to apply it, and there would be no
need for abortion as a back-up. It would be
entirely harmless and inoffensive, so no one
could feel a disinclination to use it. Such a
perfect instrument is still many years of
research distant.

Certain problems of the present day will,
however, persist-into the era of perfect contraception. An enduring contradiction seems
to exist between the desire of parents for
children and the capacity of the earth’s
crust to maintain population.

Social Biology

One aspect of the contradiction arises because parents usually want children of both
sexes. If parents are satisfied to have two
children that would grow to maturity, but
insist that the two include one boy and one
girl, it turns out that they would need to
average more than three children in all. Let
us see by what probability mechanism the
two children, which on the average would
keep the population at a desirable constancy, become three children and, ultimately,
an intolerable burden on the ecology, merely
because parents continue to reproduce until
they have a child of each sex.

If the probability of a boy on a particular
birth is 6, then the chance that the couple
will have first a girl and then a boy is (1 —
b)b. Let us continue with those instances
where the couple end up with a boy. The
probability of having two girls in succession
and then a boy is (1 — 0)b; of having three
girls and then a boy is (1 — 5)°}. The expected number of children in this series is

211 — db +311 —d)%+....

Comparing this with our analysis of the
mean months of exposure to conception, in
which we required the sum p + 2(1 — )
p+31 — p)*o+..., wesee that the two
are identical, except that now our sum lacks
the initial term 6. The sum of the # series
was 1/p, and hence we now have the sum
1/b, but need to subtract 5, to obtain
(1/b) — 8.

The argument for the contingency where
the couple achieves one child of either sex
but ends up with a girl is exactly the same,
but we have to replace 5 by 1 — 34, to obtain
(1/(1 — 6)) — (1 — 4).

The expected number in total is the sum
of the expected number ending with a boy
and that ending with a girl, or

1 1
5-b +75 7-0-5)
1 1
=F+7757 1.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 18, No. 2

If 6 equals }, the mean number of children on this last works out to 3; if 6 departs
from 34 the mean is greater than 3. With a
departure of (6 — 4) the mean number of
children can be shown to be approximately
3 + 16(6 — $)*, which gives an average
number of children of 3.002 for the usual sex
ratio at birth of 105 boys per 100 girls.

What in fact are the sex preferences of
parents? The first stage of a study in Hull,
England, shows that 45.7% of recently married couples want one boy and one girl;
15.4% want two boys and one girl; 12.6%
want two boys and two girls. Considering
the three quarters of parents that fall into
these three categories, we find that on the
average they want 2.55 children. But because of their preferences for certain boygirl combinations they will on the average
actually attain about 3.7 children.

All this would change drastically with the
advent of control of sex in the offspring.
Parents wanting one boy and one girl would
average two children rather than three or
more. The mean for the surveyed group
above would go down from 3.7 to 2.55.

Moreover, a secondary effect would appear with the ability to determine sex. Preferences for boys being stronger on the average, the next generation would have a predominance.of men—anything up to 60% is
conceivable. The proportion of the population that could get married would decline.
Abstracting from any change in the total
population, a drop to 40% women from the
usual 48% would in itself cause a fall in the
birth rate of one sixth, supposing the birth
rates of women to be the same as before.

A further effect would follow in what one
might call the dynamics of the sex ratio.
With abundance of boys the tastes of parents would alter. Before even the first generation of children under the regime of free
choice of sex grew to marrying age, parents
would have an increased appreciation of
girls. They might even respond with an excess of girls. Some swaying back and forth

Birth Control

 

119

between boys and girls would subsequently
occur.

A model for the transitional behavior of
parents following on the invention of sex
control is not yet in existence, but we can
suggest the hypothesis that the immediate effect of sex control would be an excess
of boys, and the ultimate effect something
close to the present sex ratio. This would
mean a considerable temporary reduction in
the birth rate over the transitional period,
and a permanent more substantial reduction
through the mechanism earlier described
when parents no longer need to average
three children in order to be assured of one
boy and one girl.

FAMILY SIZE AND THE BIRTH RATE

The new demography, written with the
accent on birth rather than death, and in
terms of decisions by individual couples on
having and not having children, still requires a link to the old, which stressed populations and their annual rates of increase.
We want a way of going from average family
size to the rate of increase of the population.

Suppose a community in which married
couples average c children, and where the
age at which they have these does not
change over time. How fast will that community grow from year to year? The answer
to this question depends on the proportion
of individuals who marry, the average age
at which they have children, the distribution of their children by sex, and the probability of babies surviving to have children
themselves. Let us consider the female side
of the process only, though an analogous
argument would apply for males.

If married couples have ¢ children, and a
fraction m of women marry, then the average number of children per (married or
single) woman is the product of these, cm. If
the proportion of births that are girl babies
is f, a number close to 0.49 for most populations, then the average number of female
progeny to a woman is cmf. If the propor
 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

120 Keyfitz

tion of these who live to reproductive age is
on the average /, the surviving children per
woman number cmfl. Finally, if the age at
childbearing is 7, then the ratio per generation cmfl is converted to a ratio of increase
per year by taking the 7th root: “/¢mfij,

In order to allow for variation in ages at
childbearing, we have to take as the generation a number slightly greater than the observed arithmetic mean age of childbearing.
However, the excess is usually a year or less.
Similarly, the mean chance of survival has
to be an average of survivorships weighted
by the ages of childbearing; but with low
mortality this is close to the probability of
surviving to the mean age of childbearing.
Moreover, the annual increase is usually
reckoned on a compounding basis, with the
period of compounding infinitely small,
while we have calculated a simple ratio of
increase per year. These refinements alter
the results very slightly, and we need not be
detained by such details here.

The result, that the ratio of population
in one year to that in the preceding year is
x/cmfl, tells us that when mortality was
high, variation in proportion surviving
could make a good deal of difference. The
fact that the proportion of babies surviving
to bear children themselves has gone up
from about 0.5 just three or four decades
back in many less developed countries to
0.9 now is what underlies the contemporary
population problem; further increase cannot
make much difference.

The proportion f of births that are girls is
up to now a biological fact and does not
change much. The mean age of childbearing
T has gone down with today’s earlier marriage; in Sweden of the nineteenth century
T was as high as 32 years, and now for some
countries is as low as 26. If everything else
remains the same, the younger average age
means a shorter generation and correspondingly more rapid turnover, which has exactly
the same effect on growth as an increased

Social Biology

number of children per family. In at least
one recent year Canada showed a higher
ratio of births to women than the United
States, but a lower rate of increase because
the mothers were older.

A further development of this logic shows
that children born to a woman of age 40
have only about half the impact on the
long-term rate of increase that children
born to women of age 20 have. Birth-control
programs tend to attract older women first,
and only later do they attract young women.
Insofar as the new confidence in birth
control encourages couples to have their
children in a clump while they are young,
rather than having the same number
spread over 25 years, the birth-control program could actually increase the rate of
growth of the population. Fortunately,
most couples use birth control to have
fewer children as well as to have them
younger.

Recent statistics of births in Hong Kong,
Taiwan, and other places where massive
programs of modern contraception have
been introduced show a sharp reduction in
childbearing at the oldest reproductive ages
of women, while younger women are slower
to respond. Aside from the shortening of the
generation, any forward projection has to
take account of the fact that the age-specific
rates for older women cannot fall below zero.
It needs no mathematics to see that a levelling of the birth rate will occur unless the
birth contro] movement spreads to younger
women. There are signs that it is doing so in
certain countries around the rim of South
and East Asia.

CONCLUSION

Advances have been made in the technique of contraception, and these are being
adopted in various parts of the world. The
effect that the adoption of the loop or the
pill has in averting births that would occur
without protection, or with older forms of

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

Vol. 18, No. 2

contraception, is a main interest of contemporary demography. To estimate this
effect one must regard conception and birth
as a renewal process for the individual woman. Although the models of the preceding
pages are very simple, they show the lines
along which correct calculations can be
made. Further advances in theory are producing more realistic models, and large
amounts of data collection now going forward provide better estimates of such pa
Birth Control

121

rameters of the process as probability of conceiving in a given month without protection
and with various types of contraceptives.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This paper was written at the East-West
Population Institute of the University of
Hawaii. In developing this exposition I had the
benefit of comments by Lee Jay Cho, Monica
Fong, Louis Henry, James A. Palmore, Robert
Potter, and John Ross, as well as access to unpublished materials by Robert Potter and
Mindel Sheps.

REFERENCES

Henry, L. 1968. Essai de calcul de l’efficacité de Ia
contraception. Population 24:265-278.

Léripon, H., and L. Henry. 1968. Influence du
calendrier de la contraception. Population
24:1009-1054.

Porter, R. G. 1960. Some relationships between
short range and long range risks of unwanted
pregnancy. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart. 38:255263.

 

. 1970. Births averted by contraception: An
approach through renewal theory. Theoret. Pop.
Biol. 1:251-272.

Potter, R. G., A. K. Jain, and B. McCann. 1970.
Net delay of next conception by contraception:
A highly simplified case. Pop. Stud. 24:173-192.

Potter, R. G., B. McCann, and J. Saxopa. 1970.
Selective fecundability and contraceptive effectiveness. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart. 43:91-102.

SuEeps, MInpEt C. 1963. Effects on family size and
sex ratio of preferences regarding the sex of children. Pop. Stud. 17:66-72.

. 1964. On the time required for conception.

Pop. Stud. 18:85-97.

. 1967. Uses of stochastic models in the evaluation of population policies, P. 115-136. In Proceedings of the fifth Berkeley symposium on
mathematical statistics and probability, IV.
Univ. of California Press, Berkeley.

SHeEps, MInvEL C., and E. B. Perrin. 1963. Changes
in birth rate as a function of contraceptive effectiveness. Amer. J. Pub. Hith. 53:1031-1046.

. 1966. Further results from a human fertility
model with a variety of pregnancy outcomes.
Hum. Biol. 38:180-193.

TreTzE, C. 1959. Differential fecundity and effectiveness of contraception. Eugen. Rev. 50:231
 

 

 

 
