Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Malthus on population quality

Edmond Cocks

To cite this article: Edmond Cocks (1971) Malthus on population quality, Social Biology, 18:1,
84-87, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1971.9987904

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1971.9987904

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 8

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:54
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

Brief Reports

Malthus on Population Quality

Edmond Cocks

Virginia State College
Petersburg, Virginia

Jean Mayer has added another dimension to population literature in his article
‘Towards a Non-Malthusian Population
Policy” (1969) in which he finds the famous starvation curb on population no
longer effective under the conditions of
present-day food technology. As a result, he
sees the world faced with an even greater
danger of over-population than predicted
by the grimmest disciple of the Gloomy
Don, and writes “famine or the threat of
famine is perhaps the worst method of limitation, but it would work” (p. 9).

Furthermore, giving Malthus another
brisk whirl, he states that the greater danger to our overburdened environment
comes, not from the poor, but from the
wealthy nations of the world. According to
Mayer, the solution is to turn away from
the automatic economic quantity control
ideas associated with Malthus and return
to the population quality control ideas
identified with Plato and Aristotle. Mayer
writes, “If we believe, like Plato and Aristotle, in trying for excellence rather than
in rejoicing in numbers, we need a population policy now, for the rich as well as the
poor. Excellent human beings will not be

84

 

produced without abundance of cultural as
well as material resources and, I believe,
without sufficient space” (p. 13).

It would be strange if a scholar like
Malthus with a Cambridge education
should ignore the classical treatment of his
favorite subject and, of course, he did not.
He rejected Plato’s ideas on population because he believed, with Aristotle, that
equality of property would result in overpopulation and paraphrased Aristotle’s
view as being the following: “For if children multiply beyond the means of supporting them, the law will necessarily be
broken and families will be suddenly reduced from opulence to beggary—a revolution always dangerous to public tranquility” (Malthus, 1960).

Malthus wrote, “It appears from these
passages that Aristotle clearly saw that the
strong tendency of the human race to increase, unless checked by strict and positive
laws, was absolutely fatal to every system
founded on equality of property. .. .”” More
revealing than Malthus’ attitude toward
classical ideas was his response to the scientific optimism of his own age, for this
was the start and the key to his philosophy.
Vol. 18, Noa. 1

The idea of the improvability, if not the
perfectibility of the human race was presented by Marquis de Condorcet in Outline of an Historical View of the Progress
of the Human Mind (1795), a volume that
inspired both Godwin and Malthus to their
different responses. Condorcet, in speaking
of the “improvement of our natural organization itself,” says, ‘But may not our
physical faculties, the force, the sagacity,
the acuteness of the senses, be numbered

wnamong the qualities, the individual imS provement of which it will be practicable
Sto transmit? An attention to the different
breeds of domestic animals must lead us to
S adopt the affirmative of this question, and
Aa direct observation of the human species
Sitself will be found to strengthen the opinion” (Carrol, p. 80).

“ Malthus, whose interest was to expose
Sthe weaknesses of a socialist state, was
equally determined to prove the falsity of
Eany program to improve the human species
5 S (at least by any conscious effort on the part
‘sof man). He wrote:

But the fallacy and absurdity of this argument will sufficiently appear from a slight
examination of what Mr. Condorcet calls the
organic perfectibility, or degeneration, of the
race of plants and animals, which he says may

be regarded as one of the general laws of
nature (p. 60).

It cannot be true, therefore, that among animals, some of the offspring will possess the
desirable qualities of the parents in a greater
degree, or that animals are indefinitely perfectible .  ®. 61).

Downloaded by [University

The foundations therefore, on which the arguments for the organic perfectibility of man
rest, are unusually weak and can only be considered as mere conjectures. It does not
however, by any, means, seem impossible,
that by attention to breed, a certain degree
of improvement, similar to that among animals, might take place among men. Whether
intellect could be communicated may be a
matter of doubt; but size, strength, beauty,
complexion and perhaps even longevity are
in a degree transmissible. ... As the human
race however could not be improved in this

Brief Reports 85

way, without condemning all the bad speci
mens to celibacy, it is not probable that at
tention to breeding should ever become gen
eral... (p. 63).

Malthus does mention as an exception to
his rule—the ancient family of the Bickerstaffs who improved their aristocratic looks
with a “very judicious cross with Maud,
the milkmaid, by which some capital defects in the constitutions of the family were
corrected” (p. 63). Bickerstaffs or no, it
is clear that Malthus wanted no part of
the Condorcet program of eugenic breeding. The reasons are clear: Condorcet
meant that the science of eugenics should
be put to the service of “the progress of
equality.” In short, the French revolutionist meant to use the method to level mankind upward, to create an equality of superior humanity.

Malthus said ‘The structure of society,
in its great features, will always remain unchanged. We have every reason to believe
that it will always consist of a class of
proprietors and a class of Labourers. . .”
(p. 593). He believed the class structure,
confirmed and cemented by property rights,
was a permanent part of the human condition. He doubted and challenged the possibility of social equality or of any extensive
human organic improvement.

Malthus chose a bad time to be a prophet
of doom. During the nineteenth century
scientists and pioneers opened vast areas
for human exploitation, and by the booming 1850’s the enemies of Malthus all but
published his official obituary. They were
premature. One of the great comebacks in
intellectual history occurred in the 1860’s
when Malthus rode back into respectability
on the shoulders of the new scientific giants
of the age, the sociologist Herbert Spencer
and the biologist Charles Darwin. This
was done, as Gertrude Himmelifarb (1959,
p. 161) has said, by “turning Malthus on
his head.” The theory of population proposed by “the enemy of all reform” was
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

86 Brief Reports

made the mechanism by which biological
evolution took place. According to the new
science, those who survived the Malthusian
test were different from those who did not
and that difference was their key to survival. These differences, surviving and reproducing, gradually changed the character
of the race for the better. While Malthus
had seen the harsh struggle of life as a test
for moral survival, Darwin saw it as the
test of physical survival and perpetuation.

However, outside the cult of the business
tycoon, the Malthusian Darwinism had
very limited appeal, and it was soon clear
to most that the conditions of nineteenth
century Western civilization did not recreate the Paleolithic Age. Darwin himself
was pessimistic about the biological effects
of civilization on man and saw his famous
laws of survival operating in reverse.

Since “natural conditions” of the sort
postulated by Darwin did not exist, and
since civilization was obviously an artificial
environment, it did not take long before
those who were attempting to understand
the implication of evolution to contemporary life to hit upon the idea of artificial
evolution. If the Malthusian law did not
operate automatically in civilized society,
the same effects could be achieved by conscious effort.

Darwin’s cousin, Francis Galton, undertook to correct this new version of the
“error... in the physical constitution of
the universe” by writing Hereditary
Genius (1869) and founding the modern
eugenics movement, but not in the form
that Condorcet visualized it. Galton’s interest was only in the exceptional, not in
the average, the focus of his attention was
on genius. The mass of society seemed beyond redemption. He compiled a stud-book
of the best families as a breeding guide.

Galton’s crediting of most of the great
creative achievements of the world to a select few families sat poorly on the stomach
of self-educated sociologist Lester Ward

Social Biology

and he made himself the champion of the
anti-Galtonian movement. However, it does
not seem to be in order to classify him as
an anti-eugenist as some have. In his Dynamic Sociology (1883) he wrote ‘The
principle of artificial selection which he
[man] has been taught in nature, and has
applied to her creatures, more as an art
than as a science, to his immense advantage, he has not yet thought of applying to
himself. Not until he does can he claim
any true distinction from other animals.”
This position of Ward’s was not contradicted by his later attack (1906) upon a
speech given at a meeting of the American
Sociological Association which presented
the then current (Galtonian) version of
social Darwinism as “the most complete
example of the oligocentric world view
which is coming to prevail in the higher
classes of society and would center the entire attention of the whole world upon an
almost infinitesimal fraction of the human
race and ignore the rest.”

It is clear that Ward and many who followed him rejected at least this version of
Galtonian selective breeding for essentially
the same reason that Malthus had rejected
Condorcet’s proposal—because they saw it
as a political instrument in the hands of
one class. The difference was that Malthus
was convinced that Condorcet meant to
equalize the human race and thus end the
class structure of society. Ward was convinced that in Galtonian eugenics exactly
the reverse was being proposed—the existing class structure was being strengthened
by the use of genetic science.

It is interesting to notice that Ward was
complaining, not because eugenic measures
were being proposed for the masses, but because they were not being proposed. Hofstadter in his book Social Darwinism
(1945) was in error in interpreting Ward’s
admittedly confusing ideas on genetics as
that of an anti-geneticist. Ward (1883, p.
134-135) wrote:
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 18, No. 1

If we call biological process natural, we must

call the social process artifical. The funda
mental principle of biology is natural selection, that of sociology is artificial selection.

The survival of the fittest is simply the sur
vival of the strong, which implies and would

better be called the destruction of the weak.

If nature progresses through the destruction

of the weak, man progresses through the pro
tection of the weak.

Hofstadter is correct in stating that some
of the popularity of the eugenics movement
came from the growing concern over the
increasing numbers of immigrants from
south and southeastern Europe. Again it
was political considerations which determined the positions of the attackers and
defenders of eugenic measures.

Considering his views, Ward’s conversion
to the ideas of Gumplowicz (1883) and
Ratzenhofer (1898) (the master race theory) seem surprising, but as Hofstadter says,
many who rejected social Darwinism as it
applied to the individual accepted versions
of the theory as a national experience.
Ward (1903, p. 203-204) wrote, “Gumplowicz and Ratzenhofer have abundantly
and admirably proved that the genesis of
society as we know it has been through the
struggle of races.”

Certainly the Gumplowicz and Ratzenhofer theory applied by Adolph Hitler did
more than any other measure to bring into

Brief Reports 87

disrepute any social measures designed to
reduce or improve the quality of the population. With Adolph Hitler and his race
policies, the fears of Malthus and Ward
were realized. Population control was attempted by a political party for political
purposes. Curiously enough, the program
was designed to serve not a class but a
racial purpose. The fact would no doubt
have startled Malthus, but should not have
surprised Ward. Also, along with the racial
objectives, the Hitler program aimed at the
elimination of the “unfit” elements of the
German population itself, often by sterilization or in some cases by execution. The
use of certain of the United States state
sterilization laws as defense measures at the
Nuremberg trials was certainly a factor in
their later repeal or abolition by court
action.

Enough has been said and offered to
make the point that political considerations
are deadly to any proposal to restrict the
numbers or improve the qualities of any
population. This is especially true when the
problem involves race. Consequently, the
problem of reducing the numbers and improving the quality of our human population comes down again to the same problem
it has represented from Condorcet to Ward
—the problem of depoliticizing both the
policies of birth control and eugenics.

REFERENCES

DE ConporceT, Marouis Jean. 1960. Outline of an
historical view of the progress of the human
mind. gn Harry J. Carrol, Jr., The Development
of Civilization, Vol. 2. Scott, Foresman, and
Company, Chicago.

GALTON, Francis. 1962. Hereditary genius. World
Publishing Co., Cleveland.

GuMPLOWwicz, Lupwic. 1883. Rassenkampf. Berlin.

HIMMELFARB, GERTRUDE. 1959. Darwin and the
Darwinian revolution. Doubleday Anchor, Garden City.

HorstTadTer, RICHARD, 1945. Social Darwininism in
American thought. Univ. of Pennsylvania Press,
Philadelphia.

Maver, JEAN. 1969. Towards a non-Malthusian
population policy. Columbia Forum, Summer.
New York, New York.

Mattuus, THomMAs Roser. 1960. An essay on the
principle of population. Everyman edition. Random House, New York.

RATzENHOFER, GusTAv. 1898. Sociologische Erkenntness. Berlin.

Warp, LESTER. 1883. Dynamic sociology. D. Appleton and Co., New York.

. 1903. Pure sociology. Macmillan, New
York.

 
