Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Reply to note by Dasvarma and Balasubramanian

K. P. Singh

To cite this article: K. P. Singh (1976) Reply to note by Dasvarma and Balasubramanian, Social
Biology, 23:1, 91-92, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1976.9988209

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988209

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. I Communications 91

high child mortality, which in turn results
in smaller anovulatory periods in noncontraceptive societies. This process gives rise
to smaller birth intervals and consequently
higher fertility. Again, high fertility is associated with poor health of the mother
and child, and poor child care, which results in high child mortality. These are the
biological and public health factors which
operate upon fertility and child mortality.
There are also the psychological factors
which, in the face of high child mortality,
influence parents to have large numbers of
children in order to ensure the survival of
at least some of the offspring. Thus, the
relationship between fertility and child
mortality is quite complex.

Further, it has been assumed that ‘“(a)
the higher the social status, the lower will
be the incidence of child mortality, and
(6) the lower the incidence of child mortality, the lower will be the family size”
(Singh, 1974, p. 385). This assumption
leads to the conclusion that child mortality
is an intervening variable, a conclusion
which is contrary to what has been stated
in the third paragraph of the paper.

Reply to Note by Dasvarma and

Balasubramanian

K. P. Singh

Department of Sociology
Punjab University
Chandigarh, India

It should be pointed out that the sample
was chosen from the Chandigarh population and is representative of all women
above the age of 20 years. Hence, the findings pertain only to Chandigarh and not to

The fourth social status category was
found to exhibit a lower level of fertility
than the third, and this result was ascribed
by Singh to certain “exceptions” in the
fourth category. In this context it was
stated that “had these exceptions not existed, the fertility of the fourth group would
have been the highest” (Singh, 1974,
p. 387). Surely, when we are dealing with
marital fertility, sterile women cannot be
excluded to ensure that all women had ever
borne children. At best, the sample could
have been drawn in such a way that it
represented a universe of only such women
as had ever given birth to children. Under
such circumstances, the need to make the
statement quoted above would not have
arisen. On the other hand, if the sample
were randomly drawn from the universe
of married women, the so-called “exceptions” would be acceptable as a part of
the population characteristic.

Although the paper brings out an important issue of demographic research in India,
more intensive studies covering larger sections of the population are needed to draw
any meaningful and valid conclusion.

India as a whole. In the original title, the
phrase “in India” was not included and appears to have been added afterwards for
the sake of identification of the country to
which the study pertains.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

92 Communications

Regarding sampling procedure, as already stated, two subuniverses were taken
because it was not possible to take a sample
from the total universe, as neither the
names of working women nor of housewives
were listed as such in any private or official
records. Hence, the first sample was drawn
from the study of Social Structure of a
Planned City, Chandigarh (Orient, Longman, 1968). In this study, 10 per cent of
the city population was taken, and out of
that 10 per cent a further 10 per cent sample was drawn from the women above the
age of 20 years, for the purposes of the
present study. The second sample was
drawn by preparing a list of all women
working in different organizations in
Chandigarh, and since the number of
women in the list was not too large,
the total universe was taken. Therefore,
the sample drawn was representative of
the population in Chandigarh.

Since it was an exploratory study and
the differences in the proportion of children
surviving in different categories were quite
obvious, rigorous statistical treatment was
not given.

It is true that social status explains significant differentials in mortality when
status categories are large enough, but in
the present study the purpose of taking
four categories separately was to observe
the influence of each of the variables separately. For instance, in categories 1 and

Social Biology

2, there is one important status differential.
Category 1 refers to highly educated working women, whereas Category 2 refers to
only highly educated nonworking women.
Education is common to both the categories; with one common variable, the
purpose was to see the influence of another
variable—employment. A similar situation
exists for categories 3 and 4. Hence, it
should be mentioned that the purpose of
taking so many categories separately was
to see the influence of each variable.

The assertion that child mortality is an
intervening variable and not a dependent
one is only true when we study social
status as an independent variable and fertility as a dependent variable through the
intervening variable of mortality. But as
it is used in the present paper, child mortality is also an intervening variable in the
sense that social status influences mortality,
besides other variables, through fertility.
Women of lower social status have higher
fertility partly because they are ignorant
of family planning techniques and partly
because of their fatalistic attitude towards
life, considering children as God’s gift.
Successive births at short intervals due to
poor health of the mother result in higher
mortality which, of course, again may result in higher fertility. In fact, as admitted
by the writers themselves, the relationship
between fertility and mortality is a complex
one and is really a two-way relationship.

H. K. Cooper Institute Seminar on the

Management of Oral-facial Anomalies

with Communicative Disorders

The Twenty-first Annual Seminar on
Management of Oral-facial Anomalies with
Communicative Disorders will be presented

October 11-15, 1976, at the H. K. Cooper
Institute, Lancaster, Pennsylvania. The
faculty will consist of the department heads
