Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Factors affecting the choice of contraceptive
method by a group of OEO patients

Susan H. Cochrane

To cite this article: Susan H. Cochrane (1975) Factors affecting the choice of
contraceptive method by a group of OEO patients, Social Biology, 22:2, 173-180, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1975.9988162

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1975.9988162

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB ann | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
ali] Article views: 1
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 2 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Factors Affecting the Choice of

Contraceptive Method by a Group of

OEO Patients

Susan H. Cochrane

Department of Economics
University of South Carolina
Columbia, South Carolina

Birth control information and materials
are generally made available to individuals
who are free to ignore them. Thus, population control policies, a subject of grave
concern jn both developed and developing
countries, must be indirect. That is, population policies must be designed to affect
what individuals can and want to do rather
than what they must do. In the United
States, the number of available ways of
controlling births has recently been expanded as a result of abortion law liberalization and relaxation of many hospitals’
sterilization guidelines. Nevertheless, contraception continues to be the major method
of birth control in the United States.

To achieve a maximum reduction in
births per unit of expenditure within a
voluntary framework, cheap, attractive,
and effective methods must be designed. To
do this, the factors which determine the
answers to the following three questions
must be known. (1) Will a given individual
adopt any method of birth control? (2)
Which method will be adopted? (3) Will
the patient continue using the method selected? Of course, these questions are diifficult to separate. Recent research on

 

 

continuation rates, for example, indicates
that intrauterine device users tend to have
much higher continuation rates than those
using another highly effective method, oral
contraceptives (Hall and Reinke, 1969;
Tietze and Lewit, 1971). This fact, together with the fact that the annual cost
of using an IUD is quite low if it is used
over an extended period of time, cannot be
ignored in a discussion of the economics of
population policies.

A great deal of research has been done
on the first question and a growing amount
on the third. Very little, however, has been
done on the second. This paper reports the
results of an attempt to use discriminant
analysis to determine the combination of
characteristics which would best enable one
to predict whether a woman will decide to
use oral or intrauterine contraception. It
is our hypothesis that at the time choice is
made it takes a greater commitment to
accept the IUD, which is usually retained
until removed by a physician, than to accept oral contraceptives that can be discontinued at any time. This hypothesis
would seem to be in agreement with the
results obtained in a recent article in this

173

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

174 Cochrane

journal (Bauman and Varavej, 1972). The
data used in the present study is indirect,
but it does provide insights into the problem.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The data used for the present study were
gathered between October and December,
1970, from the Provisional Health Report
Forms completed for all patients at an
OEO-sponsored Planned Parenthood clinic
in Columbia, South Carolina. At this clinic
there were files for approximately 450 current patients. (Patients are considered
“current” if they have been to the clinic
for their initial examination or a follow-up
examination within the last twelve months.)
Of these patients, 130 were using IUD’s,
and 292 were using oral contraceptives.
Approximately 90 per cent of the patients
were black. Twenty-one per cent of the patients were under 20 years of age, and 73
per cent of the patients were in the most
fertile age groups, under 30.

In this study, quantitative and dummy
variables were used in deriving the discriminant functions. The factors expressed
by the quantitative variables were age,
education, number of children, number of
pregnancies less number of living children,
and months since termination of last pregnancy. In addition, for a subgroup of 127
individuals, available data on weekly income per family member were used. All of
these factors have been used frequently
in studying fertility behavior.

The dummy variables were used to express the following factors: race, method
by which 2 patient was referred to the
clinic, contraceptive method used in the
past two years, outcome of last pregnancy,
and residence (rural or urban). For each
factor there exists one less dummy variable
than there are categories for that factor.
For example, there are 6 categories of race
given on the Provisional Health Report

Social Biology

Form (Black, white, Puerto Rican, other
Spanish, American Indian, and other). The
first dummy variable would equal unity if
the patient were Black, and zero otherwise.
To prevent linear dependence between the
dummy variables, there must be one less
variable than there are meaningful (nonzero) categories (Suits, 1957). In our case,
since all patients were classified as Black
or white, there was only one dummy variable for race.

Race, residence, and previous use of contraception have frequently been found to
affect fertility behavior. Referral method
was used because it was felt that the more
recently promoted TUD method would gain
acceptance mainly from those referred by
other patients who had found the method
to be good for themselves. Outcome of last
pregnancy was included because it would
possibly be a reflection of a past induced
abortion or of the poor health of the woman.
Both of these factors would make future
pregnancies undesirable and increase the
commitment to fertility control.

The first step in deriving the discriminant
function was to find the means and standard deviations of all nonzero variables for
the users of oral and intrauterine contraceptives. In addition, the correlation between
the variables for the combined data were
calculated. Then variables were dropped
to eliminate linear dependence between the
dummy variables and correlations of over
0.7 between any two variables. The reduced number of variables were then used
in a_ step-wise discriminant function
BMDO?7M to determine which added significantly to the discriminant function. In
the third step, the variables which added
significance to the function were used to
determine the coefficients of the discriminant function. The approach was used both
for the whole group of 422 patients using
either IUD’s or oral contraceptives and for
the subgroup of 127 women for whom in
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan} at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. 2

come data was available. The discriminant
functions were used to classify a random
sample of patients from a second OEOQOsponsored clinic in the same city. This secondary check provides an estimate of the
predictive ability of the functions.

RESULTS

DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE MEANS

Hall (1969) compared the characteristics
of pill and IUD users participating in the
Baltimore Public Program. Using analysis
of variance and a 1 per cent level of significance, she found that “Among whites
and non-whites, the oral method reached
women who were significantly younger, had
fewer children, were of a lower socio-economic level, and more frequently married
than those reached by the intrauterine
method” (Hall, 1969, p. 57).

In Table 1, the difference in mean characteristics between the users of the two

Choice of Contraceptive Method

 

175

methods in the Columbia, South Carolina
study are summarized. At the 1 per cent
level of significance, we find that users of
the pill are younger, have fewer children,
and are more likely to have used the pill
in the last two years than those using an
IUD. This finding seems to be an agreement with Hall’s observations. The only
variables that might reflect socioeconomic
level are income per family member and
education. For the subgroup of 127 patients, it seems that income is significantly
higher at a 10 per cent level for pill users
than JUD users, There is no significant difference between the education of the two
groups. This finding conflicts with Hall’s
results, However, Hall stressed that differences between users vary from clinic to
clinic.

Table 1 shows other significant differences between the two groups. At a 5 per
cent level of significance we find that users

TABLE 1
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN MEAN VALUES FOR ORAL AND IUD PATIENTS:
OEO-sPonsoRED PLANNED PARENTHOOD Ciinic, CotumsisA, SouTH CaROLINA*

 

 

 

Variable Oral IUD t

1. Age Pet hetensetoeeoeseteneseeteoeeeenTeeseHesseoe 24.57 27.23 —3.59F
7. Rate (BACKS 1) scscncnecaccacvescscsnesgunes 0.90 0.83 2.11f
3. Hospital referral Pe ORO OHH eee eOHOOSETESEHEEHOOS 0.54 0.50 0.25
4. Other patient referral .........ceeeee. sseeesaemes 0.11 0.08 0.81
5. Program personnel referral .....sccccsscecccevecs 0.33 0.35 —0.44
6. No previous method ..-...sccrccncccnvocccssscee 0.26 0.16 2.138
7. Previous oral PRC CR OHO FEHR HRHREHRPEOHTHEREKREHSAMHE RHE OEE 0.64 0.07 10.6f
8. Previous IUD .......... bn bis6SeRC aE OER ES SEER 0.06 0.70 —13.9F
9. Previous foam ...ccccccesece rere TTi rere rT 0.02 0.03 —1.32§
10. Previous condom ........+. cabs onee wee ee esue ieee 0.02 0.02 0
11. Education ..........000. oi om so a oe hens 10.30 10.37 0.32
12. Number of children 2... .ccccecscccccvccscacecs 2.71 3.51 —3.13
13. Number of losses .....eceees oe ceccccsescenes eee 0.45 0.62 —1.498
14. Months since last pregnancy ....sccccsccccessces 22.79 28.77 —2.34**
15. Last pregnancy outcome: live term .......ccceeee 0.77 0.85 —1.90**
16. Last pregnancy outcome: live low weight ........ 0.08 0.06 1,00
17. Last pregnancy outcome: dead term ........eee0. 0.003 0.00 0.70
18. Last pregnancy outcome: dead other .........0.. 0.08 0.06 0.26
19. Last pregnancy outcome: not applicable ...... Th 0.06 0.02 1.578
20. Residence (rural == 1) ........ Tree rrr er rrirrie 0.22 0.29 —1.53§
21. Income (weekly, per family member) ........ pees 16,81 13.31 1.72**

* For variables 9, 10, 16, 17, 18 and 19, the sample size is too small, given the low probabilities, to make the use of a
normal approximation appropriate.

Ti per cent.

25 per cent.

§ 10 per cent.

** 20 per cent.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

176 Cochrane

of the pill are more likely to be Black, to
have previously used no method of contraception, and to have been more recently
pregnant than users of IUD’s. The younger
age of the patients using oral contraceptives
probably partially explains the lack of previous use of contraceptives. Age and no
previous method have a correlation of
—0.35. The preference of Blacks for the
pill is harder to explain, The Black patients
are if anything slightly older and of higher
parity than whites, but there are no variables correlated with race at a level above
0.3. Income is negatively correlated with
being black (r = — 0.22). But as was seen
for the sample as a whole, the income of
patients using oral contraceptives is significantly higher at a 10 per cent level than
that of the others.

If one reduces the significance level to
20 per cent, there are other variables that
are significantly different between the two
groups. First, pill users have a lower number of losses. Second, pill users are more
likely to be urban. Third, the pill users
more frequently have never been pregnant,
which is to be expected since doctors seldom
prescibe the IUD for nulliparous women.
Finally, pill users are less likely to have
previously used foam as a contraceptive.
However, for these last two variables, the
sample size was so small that the validity
of the results is questionable.

The lower losses of pill users partially
reflects their lower parity. These two variables have a correlation of 0.33. However,
number of losses reflects more than just
parity; it also reflects excess fertility. Outcome of last pregnancy reflects possible
excess fertility in terms of a woman’s health
or resort to induced miscarriage in the previous pregnancy, but number of losses reflects cumulative factors and includes child
death, a measure of poor economic conditions as well. There are no correlations
between zero parity or residence and other

Social Biology

variables that exceed 0.30, except for the
subsample which shows that zero parity
and income have a correlation of 0.55.
This correlation may explain the higher
income of pill users. The preference of rural
patients for the IUD may reflect the higher
costs to them of obtaining a supply of pills.

The income variables for the small sample show several interesting correlations.
Age and income are negatively correlated
(7 = — 0.30). Income and education have
a correlation coefficient of 0.37, while income and family size have a —0.47 correlation.

DISCRIMINANT ANALYSIS

If one wants to predict what method a
patient will choose, one could simply use
the observed differences between the means.
The best characteristic to use for prediction
would be the one with the highest ¢ value.
To use several factors to determine which
method a woman will choose, it is necessary
(1) to decide which combination of variables seem to produce the best separation
between the two groups and (2) to assign
weights to these variables. Discriminant
analysis performs this task.

The object of discriminant analysis is to
assign weights to variables in such a way
that the mean difference between a linear
combination, 2, of these variables for the
two groups is maximized per unit of dispersion of z. Once the weights are determined, a cut-off score can be obtained that
will minimize the expected cost of misclassifying observations. This cut-off score
depends on the cost of classifying a member
of Group 1 as being in Group 2, C4, and
vice versa, and the priori probability of an
observation being in Group 1, P;, rather
than Group 2, Pe. In general, the cut-off
score is (c)log (PeC2) PyCo, where c is a
constant determined from the discriminant
function.

Several steps were taken in the elimina
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. 2

tion of variables from the discriminant
function. First, all variables for which there
were no observations in one group were
dropped. “Dead term” was dropped for
this reason. In addition, some variables
were highly correlated. If two variables
had correlations of 0.7 or higher, one would
be dropped. The one dropped would be the
one least likely to affect the strength of
desire to control fertility. I felt that since
the decision to use the IUD is less easily
reversed than the decision to use the pill
and since they are almost equally effective,
women choosing the IUD were more
strongly motivated to control fertility at
the time of choosing the method. On these
grounds, age was dropped instead of number of children, and program personnel
was dropped rather than hospital referral.
In addition, to prevent linear dependency
among the outcome of last pregnancy variables, “dead other” was also dropped. The
“other” category was large enough in the
“previous method” category to prevent
linear dependency.

At this point, the BMDO7M program
was run for 422 observations using all the
variables in Table 1 except 3, 17, 18, and
21. This step-wise discriminant program
enters variables in order of their contribution to the discriminant function. The contribution is indicated by the value of “F
to enter.” If F is significant, it means that
the new variable increased the difference
in Z scores per unit dispension between the
two groups. On the basis of this F value,
three groups of variables were selected:
those that added to the function significant
at (1) a 1 per cent level or better, (2) a
5 per cent level or better, and (3) a 15 per
cent level of significance or better. The first
group of variables had three variables:
previous use of IUD’s, previous pill use, and
race. The second group contained the variables in the first group as well as previous
use of foam and the number of losses a

Choice of Contraceptive Method

177

woman had experienced. The third contained the above five variables as well as
years of schooling and residence.

These three groups of variables were
used to determine three discriminant functions. Table 2 contains the constant terms,

TABLE 2

DIscRIMINANT FUNCTIONS FOR PATIENTS AT
OQEOQ-sPONSORED PLANNED PARENTHOOD
Crrnic, CotumsiA, SourH CAROLINA

Variables 1* 2t 3t
Constant ....seeeee ees «©600.022 0.062 «0.247
Race (Black=1) ..... 0.267 0.255 0.265
Previous oral ........- 0.255 0.224 0,227
Previous IUD ......... —0.929 —0.881 —0.870
Previous foam .......- 0.324 —0.331
Education eeeevezennese eee ees —0.017
Number of losses ...... —0.055 —0.066
Residence (rural = 1) .. —0.084
Degrees of freedom .... 3,418 5,416 7,414
F value .....ccccceceee 161.48 101.08 73.71
Cut-off score ......c00. —0.052 —0.047 —0.076
Number misclassified ... 52 51 48

* All variables significant at at least 1 per cent.
¢ All variables significant at at least 5 per cent.
¢ All variables significant at at least 15 per cent.

coefficients, F values, degrees of freedom,
and cut-off scores for each of these three
functions. The cut-off scores were calculated on the assumption that the costs of
misclassification were equal between the
groups and that the a priori probability of
choosing the IUD was 0.25. Any woman
whose score is above the cut-off score will
be classified as oral.

In these discriminant functions, the most
interesting finding is that although education was not significantly different between the two groups, this variable does
contribute significantly to the function.
Also, the use of foam was significantly different between the groups at 20 per cent,
but added to the function at 5 per cent.
Other things being equal, it appears that
the higher a woman’s education, the less
likely she is to choose the pill. This finding
may confirm Hall’s observation (1969)
that pill users come from lower socioecoDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

178 Cochrane

nomic groups. Education may make a
woman more aware of new contraceptive
methods or more willing to innovate.

The coefficients also indicate that a
woman who has previously used foam is
more likely to choose the [UD than the pill.
The only explanation I could find for this
possibility was a psychological study indicating that women who have used foam
and women who are favorable to the IUD
have similar attitudes toward and understanding of their reproductive organs
(Metzner and Golden 1967). This observation suggests that a correlation may exist
between education and previous use of
foam. However, a —0.024 correlation exists between these two variables, which is
hardly significant and of the wrong sign.

The fact that the “number of losses” a
woman has experienced adds to the discriminant function at a 5 per cent level
and “number of children” does not, means
that number of losses may be the better
measure of excessive fertility. If it does
measure excessive fertility, the sign of its
coefficient seems to confirm the hypothesis
that users of TUD’s are more strongly motivated to control fertility than users of the
pill. However, it should be noted that one
loss alone is not sufficient in either the
second or third function to cause a woman
to be placed in the IUD category, and in
function 3 a woman of average education
(10 years) and one loss would still be
classified as an oral contraceptive patient.

The effect of race on classifying is difficult to explain. As mentioned before, the
interaction among income, education, and
race in the group we are studying does not
seem high enough to explain the effect of
race on method. To determine if race were
perhaps a proxy variable for other factors
affecting behavior, a discriminant function
was sought that would discriminate between
Blacks and whites on the basis of these
other variables. The only variable that en
Social Biology

tered the race function as well as the
method function was residence, and the
sign of its coefficient indicated that Blacks
were more likely to be rural, Thus, Blacks
should be more, not less, likely to pick the
IUD. One reason there is not more observable difference between Blacks and
whites is that to qualify as an OEO patient
one must be very poor and the poor have
fairly similar characteristics. It may be
that attitudes toward children differ between the Black and white poor.

An alternative explanation may be that
the IUD does require greater motivation
at the time of method selection and that
the sample is selective of highly motivated
whites. The reason may be that since
the program serves predominantly Black
women, white women feel a loss of status
in attending the clinic. Therefore, only
highly motivated whites are willing to participate in the program. Therefore, sampling bias may cause race to serve as a
proxy for motivation.

All three of the functions obtained using
the entire sample had approximately the
same ability to separate the groups on the
basis of the original data. Each gave the
correct classification about 88 per cent of
the time. On the basis of pure chance, when
one group contains 69 per cent of the observations one could expect correct classification 57.2 per cent of the time. This difference in proportion has a ¢ value of over
12, definitely significant given the sample
size. However, a portion of these correct
classifications result from sample bias. The
best test for bias is to take a secondary
sample and use the discriminant function
to classify these observations (Frank et al.,
1967).

For these purposes, a 5 per cent systematic sample was taken of the records of
patients of a second OEO clinic. This sample yielded information on 70 patients, 59
of whom were currently using the pill and

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. 2

11, the IUD. The three discriminant functions classified about equally well. Each
classified correctly 94 per cent of the time.
Although this figure is higher than the
percentage of correct classifications obtained on the original data, the per cent that
would be correctly classified by chance is
also higher, 73 per cent due to the greater
concentration of observations in one group.
The ¢ value for 93 per cent correct classifications is 3.77. This value is significant
at a 1 per cent level, given a sample size
of 70. Therefore, this function can predict
the method to be adopted by women with a
fair degree of accuracy even when these
women are attending another clinic.

To determine if income could be significant in a discriminant function, the
step-wise discriminant function was run
using data on the subgroup of 127 women
for whom we had income data. Due to the
smaller sample size, more variables had to
be dropped because of insufficient observations. Fourteen variables were included. Of
the 21 variables in Table 1, numbers 3, 9,
10, 16, 17, 18, and 19 were dropped. Of
the fourteen, only two were significant at
a 15 per cent level or better. These two
were the categories for previous users of
oral or intrauterine contraception. Since the
F value for income was 0.95, no further
use was made of the data. A larger sample
would be needed to find the effect of income
if it were to enter at all in the discriminant
function, or one might have to examine the
choice between method for women with a
broader economic background.

We have been examining the choice of
method up to this point as if the entire
decision rested with the woman in question. In reality, the decision is made jointly
by the doctor and the woman, the supplier
and the demander of birth control. Given
the data available, it is very difficult to
enter variables for characteristics of supply
in the discriminant function. The only at
Choice of Contraceptive Method

179

tempt that could be made to control for
supply conditions was to drop from the
sample all nulliparous women, since doctors seldom prescribe the IUD for such
patients. The only effect of eliminating
these women was that residence (one of
the least significant variables in earlier
functions) ceased to be significant at a 15
per cent level.

Even though very little control for supply conditions is possible, consideration of
supply conditions may help us understand
why race plays an important role in method
selection. In general, the doctors at the
clinic studied tended to be reluctant to
recommend the IUD. Thus, a woman would
probably have to be quite insistent to
persuade the doctor to prescribe an IUD
even if there were no medical contraindicators. Since the doctors were white, Black
patients as a whole may have felt more
intimidated than white patients in insisting
on a method unpopular with the doctors.
To determine if this explanation is plausible, one would have to determine attitudes,
mannerisms, and race of a wide number of
doctors and enter these variables in the
discriminant function. This would require
a study of a large number of clinics.

CONCLUSIONS

The performance of these functions indicate that at least for the two clinics under
consideration we can determine the method
of birth control a woman will select with
fair accuracy. In addition, women with
scores close to zero will probably be the
easiest to persuade to use an IUD. Before
this technique is implemented for determining the type of counseling to be undertaken, attention must be given to the cost
of misclassification. If in fact the costs of
misclassifying a potential user of oral contraceptives are higher than those of misclassfying a potential IUD user, the cut-off
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

180 Cochrane

scores should be raised before the functions
are used.

However, there are other, more serious
problems that must be considered. Traditionally, Planned Parenthood has taken a
strong position on the voluntary nature of
their program. They do not try to encourage
people to use birth control, but only to inform them of the available methods. Therefore, an attempt to alter the choice of
method by a woman may not be philosophically acceptable to Planned Parenthood. In

Social Biology

addition, the interaction between motivation and method should be studied further.
It may be that continuation rates are higher
for women using the IUD because women
choosing that method are more highly motivated at the moment of method choice
(however, it is obvious that strong motivation is also necessary for a woman to be a
successful user of the oral method). Influencing less-motivated women to use the
IUD may simply lower the continuation
rate of IUD users.

REFERENCES

Bauman, K. E., and P. Varavey. 1972. Reason for
contracepting and choice between IUD and
pill: Implications for the difference in continuation rates. Soc. Bio. 19:292-296.

Frank, R. E., W. F. Massey, and D. G. Morrrson. 1965. Bias in multiple discriminant analysis, J. Market. Res. 2:250-258.

Hatt, M. F. 1969. Field effectiveness of the oral
and the intrauterine methods of contraception:
The Baltimore Public Program. Milbank Mem.
Fund Quart, 47:55-71.

Harr, M. F., and W. A. REINKE. 1969. Factors
influencing contraception continuation rates:

The oral and the intrauterine method. Demography 6:335-346,

Merzner, R. J., and J. S. Gorpen. 1967. Psychological factors influencing female patients in the
selection of contraceptive devices. J. Fertil.
Steril. 18:845-856.

Suits, D, 1957. Use of dummy variables in reee equations. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 52:
49~556.

TreTzz, C., and S. Lewir. 1971. The IUD and the
pill: Extended use-effectiveness. Fam. Plan.
Perspect. 3:53-55.

 
