Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

The transitional effect on the sex ratio at birth of a
sex predetermination program

S. D. Walter

To cite this article: S. D. Walter (1974) The transitional effect on the sex ratio
at birth of a sex predetermination program, Social Biology, 21:4, 340-352, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1974.9988132

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1974.9988132

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB ann | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
ali] Article views: 1
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 2 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

The Transitional Effect on the Sex Ratio

at Birth of a Sex Predetermination

Program

S. D. Walter

 

Department of Epidemiology and Community Medicine

University of Ottawa
Ottawa, Ontario

It appears likely that the technology to
allow parents to choose the sexes of their
children prior to conception will become
available in the near future. If this exciting
possibility does occur, it may have profound implications for the demographic,
biological, epidemiological, and sociological
structures of a population. If the impact
of such sex predetermination (SPD) is to
be channeled in a desirable direction, quantitative estimates must be made of the diverse and complex effects which might be
expected. This paper will consider in particular the possible changes in the sex ratio
which might occur following the introduction of an SPD program.

SEX PREDETERMINATION METHODS

Sex predetermination will here be taken
to mean the determination or choice of the
sex of a child prior to its conception. A
more general term, sex control, includes the
determination or identification of the sex
of an unborn fetus. Sex determination following conception has the longer history,
a large number of theories and folklores
having been developed over many cen
turies, often concerning the physiology,
mood, or activities of a pregnant woman
or her fetus. These theories have evolved
more recently into a number of sex determining techniques, utilizing radiology and
hormone, saliva, chromosome, and amniotic
fluid analyses (Cederqvist and Fuchs,
1970; Largey, 1972). Some sex preference
might be exercised by removal of the blastocyst from the mother, determining its sex,
and then selectively reimplanting only embryos of the desired sex (Keynes, 1967).
This procedure has been demonstrated as
technically feasible in animals, although
with rather poor blastocyst survival (Gardner and Edwards, 1968). This method
applied to humans might be relatively unattractive economically in view of the
expensive microsurgery required. It should
also be remembered that if the probability
of achieving a child of a given sex on any
particular conception is approximately one
half, then an average of two such removals
and sexings would be necessary before obtaining a child of the desired sex.

The first method developed to predetermine sex before conception involves the
electrophoretic separation of X and Y

340

 

 

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No. 4

sperm, followed by artificial insemination.
Following the almost accidental discovery
of the electrochemical properties of sperm
(Schroder and Kolstov, 1933), fertility
experiments on animals were able to
achieve a 65-70 per cent accuracy in the
production of offspring of the desired sex.
(Gordon, 1958; Sevinc, 1968). Other methods which have tried to exploit the differential properties of the androsperm and
gynosperm before intercourse are centrifugation (Lindahl, 1958) and agglutination
(Bhattacharya, 1966). Success comparable
to that for electrophoresis has been claimed
for both of these methods.

Further approaches to the problem involve discriminating between the X and Y
sperm during or shortly after intercourse,
by modifying or optimizing the environment of the sperm before reaching the
ovum. Alkaline or acid douches (Cook,
1941; Unterberger, 1930) and a rhythm
schedule of intercourse (Rorvik and Shettles, 1970) use to advantage the greater
motility of the androsperm. These two
methods in combination have been claimed
to be 80% effective in the choice of sex
(Shettles, 1961).

More conjectural solutions have been the
use of special pills, foams, and jellies to
differentially affect the receptivity of the
reproductive tract to X and Y sperm. It is
also possible that further advances along
these lines may be made by investigating
the biochemical changes occurring in the
parents which are indicated by correlations
between the sex ratio at birth and such factors as stress, the use of drugs during pregnancy, toxemia, and parity. In any case, it
seems probable that at least one of the
above methods will be technically feasible
in humans, and a number of writers have
regarded it as likely to become available
in the near future (Etzioni, 1968; Taylor,
1968; Kahn and Weiner, 1967).

Sex Predetermination and the Sex Ratio 341

PREDICTING THE EFFECTS OF
SEX PREDETERMINATION

Most writers on the subject seem to
agree that the introduction of SPD would
make some changes, however small, in the
birth rate and the sex ratio at birth, which
in turn would make an impact on the structure of society as a whole. The main difficulties in assessing the possible magnitudes of these effects are the speculative
nature of the problem and the unpredictability of the behavior of a human population in such a situation. Four main areas
of information may be used in order to
make such predictions: (1) what people do
now, i.e., current and past fertility patterns
that have been observed and documented;
(2) what people would like to do now in an
ideal situation where they could realize their
ideal family size and composition; (3) what
people say they would do if SPD were available; (4) what informed authorities think
people would do if SPD were available. 
The reliability of any quantitative estimate of an effect of SPD will clearly depend on the degree of objectivity of the
data used and on how far this past information on actual, ideal, or intended fertility
is generalizable to the future when important social changes might be generated by
SPD.

Despite a wide variety of motives cited,
a preference for males in an ideal family
has been demonstrated consistently in a
variety of cultures (Largey, 1972; May
and Heer, 1968; Dinitz et al., 1954;
Markle and Nam, 1971), sometimes combined with a desire for a balanced sex ratio
in completed families. There are also indications that people presently make some
efforts toward achieving these objectives.
There is a relatively high male sex ratio
among the last-born children in families
(Winston, 1932) and a longer interval between the first and second child when
the first is male (Westoff et al., 1961). In
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

342

addition, the probability of having an additional child increases with the number of
children of like sex previously born (Clare
and Kiser, 1952; Freedman et al., 1960).

Interview data on how people say they
would react if SPD were available are unfortunately scanty. However, the general
indication is that, if they accepted the idea,
their reproductive performance would compare roughly with their ideal fertility at the
present time (Markle and Nam, 1971;
Flanagan, 1942). There is evidence to suggest that the rate of acceptance of SPD
would depend on many of the important
demographic variables, including  socioeconomic status, religion, urban or rural
residence, and previous reproductive history. Thus, differential effects on the birth
rate and the sex ratio might be anticipated
in various sectors of society, with a consequent increase in tension between these
groups. In Markle and Nam’s study (1971)
of United States college students, the proportion of respondents who said they would
use SPD was 26 per cent; but this figure
went up to 62 per cent when they were
presented with the alternative of having a
one-sex family and down to 16 per cent
when it was suggested that artificial insemination might be involved. The ultimate
utilization rate of SPD is thus very hard
to predict. Further, data of this kind derived from interviews on a subject which
may be socially unacceptable at present
may be biased. It has been suggested by
Etzioni (1968) that the movement toward
a higher proportion of males being born
might be greater than indicated by interviews.

LONG-TERM EFFECTS ON THE
SEX RATIO

All of the above discussion concerns the
initial effects that might be anticipated following the introduction of SPD and is based
on limited extrapolation from current fer
Walter

Social Biology

tility patterns and on interview-derived
data. Although inevitably more speculative,
a number of authors have concerned themselves with the long-term implications of
SPD. Here, the possible long-term behavior
of the sex ratio at birth will be examined.
In moving from short-term to long-term
prediction, one must attempt to take into
account the changes in attitudes that might
accompany the initial changes caused by
SPD. If it is supposed that the sex ratio
would initially increase in favor of males,
it might be expected that any substantial
change would then enhance the value of
females to the community, which might
precipitate a reversal of the tendency toward a high sex ratio. This process might
continue as shortages of one or the other
sex became apparent in turn, with corresponding oscillations of the sex ratio. This
concept has been proposed by several writers, including Keyfitz (1971, p. 119):
With abundance of boys, the tastes of
parents would alter. Before even the first
generation of children under the regime of
free choice of sex grew to marrying age,
parents would have an increased appreciation of girls. They might even respond
with an excess of girls. Some swaying back

and forth between boys and girls would
subsequently occur.

Largey (1972, p. 390) saw the process as
self-regulating, an overabundance of males
initiating a greater demand for females
with “a temporarily imbalanced sex ratio
generating change in norms, behavioral
patterns, and perhaps current sex preference patterns themselves so as to rebalance
the sex ratio.”

A simple mathematical model was constructed to predict the behavior of the sex
ratio under various sets of assumptions to
see if the oscillations described above could
be simulated and what the limit (or ultimate) value of the sex ratio might be. Jones
(1973) has also used models to investigate
this problem, but his models did not em
 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No. 4

   
     

B. Females who
enter SPD
program,

  

  
 
   

A. Females entering
population at risk
of pregnancy.

Cc. Females who do
not use SPD.

Fic. 1.—Categorization of births in a population where sex predetermination is used.

body any changes in attitudes or preferences as time progressed.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The structure of the model developed
here is shown in Figure 1, which illustrates
how the current sex ratio at birth may be
constructed from the contributions made
by births to females in various categories,
those women either using or not using SPD.
A parametric formulation of the model is
used, Even though the numerical values of
the sex ratio predictions are speculative,
this formulation allows an assessment of
the approximate nature and the relative
magnitudes of effects of changes in the values of the various parameters involved.

In the presentation of results, the origin
of the time scale is the point at which the
SPD program is initiated. Some of the
parameters are defined as follows. a is the
total rate of entry of all females into the
population at risk of pregnancy, assumed
approximately constant over short periods.
p(t) is the proportion of females entering
at time ¢ who use the SPD program. By
definition, (¢) = 0 for ¢ < 0, Ci(x) and
C(x) are distribution functions of the
times to conceptions for females respectively nonparticipating and participating in
the program. Thus, C2(x) is the probability

that a female in the program will have con
ceived before a time x has elapsed after
entry. G is the period of gestation, assumed
constant. 49 is the proportion of boys born

Sex Predetermination and the Sex Ratio

343

         
     
   
 

D. Sex of child chosen
independently of
current or past birth
patterns in the rest
of the population.

  
 

Current sex
ratio at birth
with contributions from
D, E, and F.

     
     
     
     

E. Sex of child influenced
by current or past birth
patterns in the rest of
the population,

F. Sex ratio unaltered
by SPD,

to nonparticipating mothers, i.e., the “natural” proportion, assumed constant. b(x)
is the proportion of all births which are
male to mothers who entered the SPD program at time x. m(t) is the proportion of
all births which are male at time ¢ to
mothers in or out of SPD program.?

Our model assumes that (1) females entering the population at risk of pregnancy
decide immediately whether or not to use
the program and that there are no subsequent transfers in or out of the program;
each individual female in the program
makes a choice of sex which remains unaltered until conception; and (3) the population is homogeneous as regards the acceptance of SPD. For simplicity, we will ignore
the effects of infertility and multiple births.
However, these constraints could be easily
removed to construct a more detailed model.
Let us now consider the male and total birth
rates at time # to users and nonusers of
SPD.

Non-SPD mothers.—Those females who
enter at time x and conceive at time i— G
have a total birth rate of a = (1 — f(x))
cy (¢ — G— x), where cx(.) is the probability density function corresponding to
C1(.). Hence, summing (integrating) over
all possible values of x, the total rate of
births at time ¢ to nonparticipators is

1 Throughout this work the proportion, m,
of births which are boys is used. The conventional
sex ratio of male births/female births may be
simply derived as m/(1-m).
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

344

_ " (1)
af. (1 — p(x)) a1 (§¢—G —x)dx

and the corresponding rate of male births

~ is (1) times Bo.

SPD mothers —tThe total rate of births
to participating females will be

—G
af p(x) ce (t —G — x) dx
and the rate of male births

—¢
af p(x) b(x) co (£ -G— x)dx.

Combining these results, we have

m(t) =

The denominator of equation (2) simplifies to the value 1 if c1(.) = co(.). We will
assume the latter to be true, because the
general behavior of m(z) is only slightly
modified by different conception time distributions for users and nonusers of SPD.

To investigate the explicit behavior of
the function m(t), we must specify particular expressions for #(.), c(.) and 6(.).
We will use

p(t) = P(1—e-*"), (3)

that is, a negative exponential growth of
the program, which eventually is used by a
proportion P of entering females. Although
empirical data following the introduction
of comparable health programs—for example, the birth control pill in the United
States (Ryder, 1972)—ften have the appearance of a logistic growth curve, the
negative exponential has the advantage of
only involving one variable parameter (B),
while P may be regarded as a multiplicative constant for this purpose. This choice
implies a slight simplification in the formulation, while yielding a model which is not

Walter

t—G —@G
fa-1@)at-—G—ade+[) 2(2) @ (¢—G —2)ax

Social Biology

unrealistic. The parameter P represents the
limit (or ultimate) utilization rate of SPD
and is the proportion of mothers from Box
A in Figure 1 who move into Box B. The
value of B gives the rate of adoption of
SPD, with high values representing a rapid
development in its use.

For the distribution of times from entry
to conception, we will take

c(x) =he-™,

(4)

implying a constant rate of conception at
any time for all females who have not previously conceived.

While equation (3) may be considered

—G -—G
bof. (1 — p(x)) es t—C—x)ax+f p(x) b(x) ce (t — G —x) dx

(2)

a reasonable model for the rate of acceptance of an innovative program and equation (4) may be verified approximately by
observation on human populations, the
specification of 5(.) is much more difficult,
and in fact can only be speculative. Let us
suppose that among the females in the program at any given time f, there is a proportion 6 who always choose to have boys,
and ¢ who always choose girls, regardless
of any previous birth patterns. These two
groups make up the mothers in Box D.

In contrast, let us suppose that the remaining proportion (1 — @ — ¢) of females
are influenced by the proportion of males
born in the total population in the past
(Box E). We might suppose that in a society where the sex ratio at birth has been
altered from the “natural” value, for example, toward an excess of males, such
mothers would react in the opposite direction and thus have girls rather more frequently. Let us assume that the proportion
of male births in this sector of the program
members (Box E) is 1 — m(t — y), where
m(t— y) is the proportion of male births

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No. 4

to the whole population at time ¢ — y, and
t is the time of entry into the SPD program of these particular discriminating
mothers. The parameter y represents a lag
period or reaction time before which parents
do not respond to previous birth patterns.
Its duration may be influenced by a number of factors including: (1) delays in the
publication of data on current fertility;
(2) the phase between such publication
and entry into the program;? and (3) the
length of time it takes for parents to react
to an excess of one sex, which may be
within a relatively short time, such as a
few months or a year, within several years,
or only after an extended period, such as
a generation.

The third factor is the single most important influence on y and, in turn, on the
effects of SPD. One might suggest that the
sex preferences of parents might change
rapidly if they wanted to improve their
children’s chances of finding a marital partner of approximately the same age. On the
other hand, they might only respond much
later when an excess of males of marrying
age existed or when there was an excess of
males in the employment market, with a
subsequent increase in the relative value of
a female. Whichever of these occurred
would have other important effects on fertility, as discussed later.

It should be remembered that any reactions to past fertility patterns could only
manifest themselves after a minimum of
approximately nine months, the length of
gestation. Further, parents would respond
not to the proportion of males born at any
particular instant of time in the past, as
assumed here, but probably to the fertility
observed over some extended period. Both

2 This phase consists of a stage in which the
decision to enter the program is being made,
some delay in entry in order to have a child at a
convenient time, and an induction period into
the program itself.

Sex Predetermination and the Sex Ratio

345

of these factors would add to the inertia
of the system, tending to dampen any very
rapid changes in the sex ratio which might
otherwise occur.

Under these assumptions, we have that
the proportion of births which are male to
mothers entering the SPD program at time
x is a weighted average of the proportions
of births to mothers with fixed and variable
sex preferences (Boxes D and E respectively), or

b(x) = 6 (5)

+ (1—6—9$)(1—m(*x—y)).
Substituting this equation into equation
(2), after simplification, we have that, if

i =4 B, the proportion of males being born
at time # is

m(t) =A + Bert-® 1 Ce—B(t—-@)
im
—D fj,

(1 —e—F2)\e—Mi—G—z)

where
A=bo+P(1—¢— Bo),
_ &6
B= 7p PU —$—~ >),
ca pa b
7B (1—¢— by),
and

D=P(1—éd—¢).

Under this formulation, equation (6) provides the description of the transitional
behavior of the sex ratio, and it is this
description which is developed to give the
results below. Although the solution of
equation (6) for m(t) may be found in
closed form, it is somewhat tedious algebraically and only numerical results will be
quoted here, with the exception of the expression for the asymptotic value which is
derived in the next section,

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

346

RESULTS
LIMITING VALUE OF THE SEX RATIO

After a very long period of time, the
proportion of entering mothers using SPD
would tend, from equation (3), to the value
P, The nonparticipators (the remaining
proportion 1—FP) would still produce
males with probability 59. From equation
(5), the participators would have a proportion of male births equal to

6+ (1—8—¢)(1—m*),
where m* is the value of m(f) after stability, or equilibrium has been reached.
We thus have that m* is, as before, a
weighted average of the sex proportions
from users and nonusers of SPD, equal to

m* = (1 — P)Bo
+ Plo + (1-6 —9$)(1— m*)].

Solving for m* gives

._ A=?) +Pa—9)

1+ P(i—6—¢4)

Table 1 gives some numerical values of

TABLE 1

EQUILIBRIUM VALUES OF THE PROPORTION OF
Brrtus Waicn Are MAte (m*)

P 0 e m*

O2 cssswusesais 0 0 0.507
OF seve ceweaws 0 0 0.503
LO wsege cuweaay 0 0 0.500
O2 sscaasraause 0.4 0.1 0.535
O.5 coc cceccceee 0.4 0.1 0.564
1.0 ...ccceseees 0.4 0.1 0.600
O22 camins nmewns 0.4 0.4 0.508
rr 0.4 0.4 0.505
Le csmseeemomee 0.4 0.4 0.500

m* for various sets of values of P, 6, and
od. With bo taken as 0.51 (approximately
the proportion of males born presently),
then if the proportions of parents with fixed
preferences for boys and girls are equal
(zero, in particular), a decrease in the sex

Walter

Social Biology

ratio would occur. However if, as is more
likely, there would be more fixed preferences for boys, a male excess would result,
the size of the excess increasing with P
and 6.

Some special cases are of interest: If
P =O, then from equation (7), m* = Bo,
which corresponds to no program participants yielding an unchanged male proportion for all ¢. If P= 1 (implying all mothers use SPD), then

m* — Ft —¢ .

2—6—¢
If d= ¢=0, then m* = 4. Thus, universal usage of SPD, combined with sex
preferences which reacted perfectly to past
fertility, would lead to a sex ratio at birth
of unity.

NUMERICAL RESULTS

Figure 2 shows the solution of equation
(6) for three sets of parameter values, with
all the variables except P being constant.
In all the results of this section, A is taken
to be 0.2. The value of y is 6 months (i.e.,
some SPD mothers react to the sex ratio
at birth six months previously); 6 = 0.4
and ¢ = 0.1, reflecting a majority preference for males in the 50 per cent of SPD
mothers with fixed sex preferences. All of
the curves begin with a male proportion of
0.51 and then increase with time. The curve
with P=1 (ultimate adoption rate of
SPD equal to 100 per cent) demonstrates
the oscillating behavior postulated above,
reaching a peak of just over 60 per cent
males two years after the first SPD births,
declining to a minimum after about four
years, and then stabilizing to approximately
the equilibrium value of 60 per cent. The
other two curves with P= 0.5 and 0.2 do
not oscillate as much, and the final values
of the male proportion are lower, reflecting
the smaller impact of SPD with less widespread usage.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 21, No. 4 Sex Predetermination and the Sex Ratio 347

PERCENTAGE OF MALE BIRTHS VS TIME SINCE INTRODUCTION OF SPD

PCT OF MALE BIRTHS

640 B=01, y =6mo., 6=04, %=01

    
  

   

620

600

580

    
 
 

P= 0.5

PE SE a A Oe SO Oo a

f P= 0.2
_——————————
i

0 ] 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
YEARS SINCE FIRST SPD BIRTHS

FIGURE 2

560

540

520

 

Whereas Figure 2 illustrates the effect build-up of the program), the male proporof P (the ultimate utilization rate), Figure tion reaches a maximum of 63 per cent after
3 shows the effect of B, or how quickly the just under two years, that is, slightly sooner
SPD method can be implemented in the than the peak for B = 0.1. In general, with
population. When B= 1.0 (a very rapid a rapid acceptance of the program, the os
PERCENTAGE OF MALE BIRTHS VS TIME SINCE INTRODUCTION OF SPD

PCT OF MALE BIRTHS

640 P=10, Y=6mo., 6=04, ¢=01
620

600

oem or a op
“tay eon
Stay sane”

580

560

1]
me

o>
=O

540

0 I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 ? 10
YEARS SINCE FIRST SPD BIRTHS

Ficure 3
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

348

cillations begin sooner and are of greater
magnitude; but the effect of B in this respect appears to be comparable to that of
P, with larger values of P giving larger and
earlier oscillations also. The utilization rate
P also has an important influence on the
long-term behavior of the sex ratio, whereas
B only affects its initial changes. Although
not shown graphically, the effect of B is insignificant when y is large, that is, when
parents react to the fertility pattern of several years previously. It also appears that
8 does not substantially affect the time period (or wavelength) of the oscillations.
In Figure 4, the influence of y is pre
Walter

Social Biology |

more quickly when parents are influenced
by birth patterns only six months earlier,
as compared to five years earlier; and in
the latter situation, changes in the male
proportion of several percentage points occur for over 20 years. This point is also
demonstrated in Figure 5 where an even
larger value of y (10 years) is used. The
period of the oscillations is now just over
10 years initially. As in Figure 1, the amplitude of the oscillations is greatly affected
by the value of P, as may be seen by comparing the two curves with 100 per cent
and 50 per cent usage of SPD.

Figure 6 shows curves with @=4=—0,

PERCENTAGE OF MALE BIRTHS VS TIME SINCE INTRODUCTION OF SPD

640
620
500 }
. “
580

560

PCT OF MALE BIRTHS

540

‘520

EF

500

0 2 4 6 8

P = 1.0, B= 0.1, 6= 0.4, $= 0.1

 

as Y —
— Y =

<
=
uv

10 2 14 16 18 20

YEARS SINCE FIRST SPD BIRTHS

FIGURE 4

sented, with two otherwise comparable
curves for y = 6 months and 5 years. With
the larger value of y, the oscillations are
greater and have a longer wavelength, with
changes in the trends of sex preferences
occurring roughly every 5 or 6 years, compared to approximately 2 years when y = 6
months. Although the ultimate proportion
of males is the same (60 per cent) for both
curves, a stable situation is reached much

which oscillate toward the stable situation
with equal numbers of boys and girls being
born. Once again, the rate of convergence
and the size of the sex ratio oscillations
depend on the time lag term y.

DISCUSSION
The above graphs show how a relatively
simple mathematical model can produce the
oscillations in the sex ratio that have been

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21,

No. 4 Sex Predetermination and the Sex Ratio 349

PERCENTAGE OF MALE BIRTHS VS TIME SINCE INTRODUCTION OF SPD

PCT OF MALE BIRTHS

640

620

600

580

560

540

520 &

500

B=01, Y=10yrs. 8=04, %=011

of ee ee tp

f ®.
i
'
f
a
i
'
i
!
a
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30

YEARS SINCE FIRST SPD BIRTHS
FIGURE 5

proposed by other authors. An examination tions made by the various parameters of
of the results indicates the effects on the the system. We may now discuss how the
amplitude and time period of the oscilla- results would be modified under slightly

PERCENTAGE OF MALE BIRTHS VS TIME SINCE INTRODUCTION OF SPD
510 P=0.5 B=01 9=0, $=0 ©

PCT OF MALE BIRTHS

5

5

A495

490

4

480

475

a5

00 ScoReEEeenennsEnest

85

 

Q I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
YEARS SINCE FIRST SPD BIRTHS

FIGURE 6
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

350 Walter

different assumptions and a few implications of the results.

It may be seen that as the time needed
to react to an excess of one or other sex (y)
becomes large, the changes in direction of
the proportion of male births are quite
abrupt (see, for example, Figure 5 with
P=1). These abrupt changes are a consequence of the model where those SPD
mothers who react to past birth patterns
do so in response to the proportion of males
born at one particular time in the past. A
more realistic assumption might be that
such mothers are influenced by the fertility
experienced over some extended period of
time in the past. If this assumption were
true, the sex ratio would change less dramatically than in the results shown here,
particularly for those with large y. Nevertheless, it is not inconceivable that, for the
first oscillation at least, a relatively abrupt
change in the trend of the sex ratio might
occur as a reflection of a “shock” reaction
to the sociological implications of, say, a
large excess of males in the population.

The parameter that has the largest individual influence on the impact of SPD is
the utilization rate P. The value of this
parameter will depend to a large extent on
the policy by which SPD is made available
to the public, and this value will in turn
affect the associated values of @ and ¢. If
SPD were made freely available to all
prospective parents, it is unlikely that the
utilization rate would be very close to 100
per cent, the value assumed in the idealized
situation for some of the results presented.
However, with such complete availability,
it is probable that a reasonable number of
SPD mothers would in fact respond to past
fertility, as has been assumed here. We
might suppose, as an alternative, that a
policy was adopted to make SPD available
only in “extenuating circumstances” for
individuals, such as cases where parents already had two children of the same sex

and wished to have another of the opposite
sex. If this were the case, the utilization
rate would be lower than if SPD were available to all parents; but the influence of
past fertility would also be much less, with
almost all SPD mothers falling in Box D
of Figure 1. If this latter policy were used,
we might expect the sum of 6 and ¢ to be
approximately one. But if the motivation
to have a third child after two previous
female births were stronger than after two
previous male births, the male excess would
still manifest itself.

A further consideration is the interaction
of SPD with other changes in societal attitudes and values. For example, if the concept of zero population growth and other
social pressures caused many parents to desire only two children, the objective of
parents to have one child of each sex would
by no means be easy to achieve without the
use of SPD. A side effect might therefore
be the widespread usage of. SPD, with a
majority of parents choosing one child of
each sex (usually with the boy first), a
small percentage choosing two boys, and
an even smaller number choosing two girls.
When parents who do not complete their
two-children families (because of mortality,
sterility, or breakdown of marriage) are
taken into account, we might infer that a
small percentage excess of males might occur under these conditions. For a further
discussion of the influence of SPD on individual parents and family building, see
Jones (1973).

The effect of the “reaction time,” y, is
also important. We have seen how when
parents only react to a male excess that has
existed for several years, the resulting instability in the sex ratio continues for a
considerable length of time. If the time period of the oscillations in the sex ratio is
more than a few years, then marital “raiding” of other age groups with a relatively
small shortage of the minority sex (usually

 

Social Biology .
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No. 4

female) becomes less feasible. If, for simplicity, we supposed that marriages took
place only between couples of the same age,
and we also assumed that the pressures to
marry and have children remained unaltered, then a rise of 10 per cent in the
proportion of males born would result in
approximately a 20 per cent decline in the
matriage rate, with a corresponding reduction in the birth rate for the people in that
age group.

In practice, a gross excess of males would
probably initiate some alterations in the
structures of marriage, and the prospect of
a greatly reduced birth rate might increase
the pressure on married women to have
more children. Some of these effects might
be reduced by early publicity of the possible effects of a sustained excess of one
sex in an attempt to modify the sex preferences of individuals currently having children. Such publicity might also tend to
reduce the differentials between the sex ratios of different sectors of society. Alternatively, an encouragement of a male excess
might be one way of initiating a substantial
decline in the birth rate, as for example in
India where the motivation to have boys

Sex Predetermination and the Sex Ratio

3501

is great. It is clear that the way in which
the people are educated about SPD will
have an important influence on the resulting
fertility.

If the techniques of sex predetermination
in humans are perfected, then the politicians and administrators of society will
have some difficult decisions to make about
if and how they should be made available
to the public. The objectives of the individual, if realized, might yield disastrous
consequences or great benefit to society. A
sustained male excess with a resultant fall
in the birth rate might present great problems to an industrial society based on expansion, but it might equally well imply
long-term good to a developing nation faced
with a population explosion. The magnitude and scope of the effects of sex predetermination will depend greatly on how
it is administered, and the more feasible it
becomes as a technical venture, the more
urgent becomes the need for research on
the subject to enable rational decisions to
be made.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author is supported by the Ontario Ministry of Health Grant R.D. 10.

REFERENCES

BHATTACHARYA, B. C. 1966. An attempt to predetermine the sex of calves by artificial insemination with spermatozoa separated by sedimentation. Nature 211:863.

Cepergvist, L. L., and F, Fucus. 1970. Antenatal
sex determination; a historical review. Clin.
Obstet. Gynec. 13:159-177.

Crare, J., and C. V. Kiser. 1952. Social and
psychological factors affecting fertility preference
for children of a given sex in relation to
terllty. Milbank Mem. Fund. Quart. 29:621
3.

Coox, R. 1941. Sex control again in the news.
J. Hered. 31:265-271.

Dini7z, S., R. R. Dynes, and A. C. Crarke. 1954.
Preferences for male or female children: Traditional or affectional? J. Marr. Fam. Liv.
16:128-131.

Erztoni, A. 1968. Sex control, science, and society.
Science 161:1107-1112.

FLANAGAN, J. C. 1942. A study of factors determining family size in a selected professional
group. Genet. Psychol. Monog. 25:50-75.

FREEDMAN, D. S., R. FReepMan, and P. K,

 

 

WHELPToN. 1960. Size of family and preferences
for children of each sex. Amer. J. Sociol.
116: 141-146.

Garpner, R. L., and R. G. Epwarps. 1968. Control
of the sex ratio of full term in the rabbit by
transferring sexed blastocysts. Nature 218:346349,

Gorpon, J. G. 1958. The control of sex. Sci, Amer.
199:87-94,

Jones, R. J. 1973. Sex predetermination and the
sex ratio at birth. Soc. Biol. 20:203~211.

Kann, H., and A. WEINER, 1967. The next thirtythree years: A framework for speculation. Daedalus, p. 705-732.

Keyritz, N. 1971. How birth control affects
births. Soc. Biol. 18:109-121.

Keynes, R. D. 1967. The predetermination of
sex. Adv. Sci. (London) 24:43-46.

LarGeEY, G. 1972, Sex control, sex preferences, and
the future of the family. Soc. Biol. 19:379-392.

LINDABL, P. E. 1958. Separation of bull spermatozoa carrying X and Y chromosomes by counterstreaming centrifugation. Nature 181:784.

Markie, G. E., and C. B. Nam. 1971. Sex pre
 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

352

determination: Its impact on fertility. Soc.
Biol. 18:73-83.

May, D. A., and D. M, Heer. 1968. Son survivorship motivation and family size in India:
A computer simulation. Pop. Stud. 22:199-210.

Rorviz, D. M., and L. B. SHett1res. 1970. How
to choose your baby’s sex. Look 24 (April):
88-98.

Ryprer, N. B. 1972. Time series of pill and JUD
use: United States, 1961-1970. Stud. Fam. Pl.
3:232-240,

Scuroper, V. N., and N. K. Korstov. 1933. Artificial control of sex of progeny in mammals. Nature 131:329.

Sevinc, A. 1968. Experiments on sex control by

Walter

Social Biology

electrophoretic separation of spermatozoa in the
rabbit. J. Reprod. Fertil. 16:7-14.

SHETILES, L. 1961. Conception and birth sex
ratios. Obstet. Gynec. 18:122-130.

Taytor, G. R. 1968. The biological time bomb.
World Publishing Co., New York.

UNTERBERGER, F, 1930. Das problem der wilkiirlichen Beeinflussung des Geschlechts beim Menschen. Deutsche Med. Wochenschr. 56:304-307.

WEstToFF, C., R. G. Potrer, P. G. Sacr, and E.
MisHLER. 1961. Family growth in metropolitan
America. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J.

WuystTon, S. 1932. Birth control and the sex ratio
at birth. Amer. J. Sociol. 38:226-231.

 
