Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Puerperal morbidity: A neglected area of maternal
health in Sri Lanka

W. Indralal De Silva

To cite this article: W. Indralal De Silva (1998) Puerperal morbidity: A neglected
area of maternal health in Sri Lanka, Social Biology, 45:3-4, 223-245, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1998.9988975

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1998.9988975

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 15

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:48

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

Puerperal Morbidity: A Neglected Area
of Maternal Health in Sri Lanka

 

W. Indralal De Silva®

Department of Demography
University of Colombo
Colombo 03, Sri Lanka

ABSTRACT: Pregnancy is the period during which a mother prepares herself physically and psychologically for the delivery and care of the offspring. However, during this period the central
concern is the welfare of the baby, but not the mother. When the mother and the child subsequently become two separate beings, the mother’s health care is totally neglected unless she develops obvious symptoms of gross physiological and psychological abnormalities. This study,
which was carried out in three MOH areas of the Kalutara District on maternal morbidity, had
two main objectives. The first was to determine the prevalence of puerperal morbidity and the
second was to identify characteristics of those with high levels of morbidity. Of the mothers who
are registered by the PHM of the study area 600 were selected for this study. Data were collected
using structured interviews conducted within the first week after puerperium (43-50 days after
delivery). The morbidity rate revealed by the study is much higher than expected. Excessive
bleeding from the vagina was reported by 40 per cent of mothers, while minor symptoms like
breast engorgement and chills were reported by many mothers. Only 11 per cent of the mothers
in the study did not have any symptoms or signs of ill health, and the rest reported one or more
illnesses. Primae gravidae and those who experienced pregnancy wastage during an early pregnancy had a higher morbidity.

 

Mothers in the Third World, and more
specifically in South Asia, with their limited resources, and cultural setup rarely get
the opportunity to think of their own health
problems except when these are life threatening. It is not surprising that women who
have been culturally conditioned to put
themselves last on the priority order are reluctant to admit having health problems or
seek medical help, especially if the ailment
is considered personal and shameful, as is
often the case with ailments related to reproductive health (Bang et al., 1989; Jejeebhoy, 1994). A large share of women in

“This article was written during the author’s oneyear term at the Harvard University School of Public
Health in Boston, Massachusetts, as a Takemi Fellow in
International Health.

developing countries place most of their
personal needs, including dietary intake,
after those of their children, husband, and
sometimes, other family members. Because of these attitudes and practices,
many mothers suffer serious health problems requiring professional care but they
do not realize this due to ignorance (Datta ©
et al., 1980; Mathai, 1989).

Over the last several decades, maternal
health care in Sri Lanka has improved
considerably compared to other developing nations. However, for cultural and
economic reasons, puerperal' maternal

'The 42 days following delivery is the generally accepted definition of the puerperium and is used by the
World Health Organization in defining maternal death
(World Health Organization, 1990). The word “postpar
223
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

224

health care has been lagging behind when
compared with the pregnancy period. Although the mother has become a beneficiary of health care attention during the
pregnancy period, the attention is basically on the child which the mother carries inside her body, but not on the
mother herself. Thus, when the mother
and the child become two separate beings, attention is paid to maternal health
care only if the mother develops gross
symptoms of physical or psychological
pathology. Even though such conditions
could be fatal, many mothers manage to
survive but endure the health consequences for the rest of their lives (Bhatia
and Cleland, 1995).

A mother’s situation becomes worse
when she has to go to work, when she belongs to an economically deprived community or social class, and when her family is large and children are not properly
spaced. In such situations, mothers have
to fend for themselves, without realizing
the risks involved. Therefore, the main
objectives of the present paper are to examine the prevalence of puerperal morbidity in Sri Lankan society and also to
identify the mothers who have experienced relatively higher morbidity conditions in the puerperium than others by using a community level survey. Such

tum,” even though heavily used in the literature, has no
specific definition with regard to the health care of
mothers immediately following childbirth (Brady and
Winikoff, 1992). A number of studies of maternal
deaths, however, have extended the scope of the definition to include deaths occurring up to three months after
delivery (Koenig et al., 1988) or even up to one year
(Walker et al., 1986). When considering morbidity, we
find that definition may become even more difficult
since some problems—for example, infertility as a result of infection incurred at delivery—may not become
apparent for many years after the causative event
(Campbell and Graham, 1991).

De Silva

Social Biology

information can be used to formulate appropriate interventions to minimize ill
health during this period of motherhood.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

In Sri Lanka, previous research has
rarely focused on maternal morbidity and
has been limited to hospital-based statistics. Hospital-based statistics are not
likely to yield an accurate picture since
many morbid conditions are not referred
to the hospital system (Fortney, 1995).
The hospital-based maternal morbidity
can therefore be thought of as the tip of
the iceberg. Thus, an important goal has
been to gather information on maternal
morbidity and care by using communitybased surveys, where mothers and health
care workers answer questions about their
experiences.

Problems that are specific to women
and related to their reproductive processes
can be divided into two groups. First,
problems occurring during pregnancy, delivery, and puerperium, referred to in the
medical literature as obstetric (maternal)
morbidity. Second, problems occurring to
nonpregnant women and outside the puerperal period of six weeks, known as gynecological morbidity. The present study obtained reports on perceived maternal
morbidity. Thus, questions on symptoms
of maternal morbidity were formulated to
be administered in sequence, starting with
symptoms during pregnancy, and then
proceeding to those during delivery, and
ending with symptoms during the first six

"No validation method like a medical examination
follow-up was adopted to check self-perceived illness.
By and large in developing countries morbidity is measured through the self-perceived approach which is
based on pain and suffering reported by individuals
(Gumber and Chen, 1996).
 

—|
=
©
N
~
5
&
oO
oO
oO
A
CO
©
Co
av.
oN
=
—
wo
'S
ws
oN
=
a
O
=
Cd
©
>>
—
=
N
~
oO
>
=
c
,
va
2
co
oO
co
CS
©
—
c
S
©
A

 

Vol. 45, No. 3-4

weeks in the postpartum period (puerperium).

A policy to improve maternal health in
Sri Lanka depends on its ability to yield a
broad diagnosis of the problem when applied in a community setting. Therefore,
the study first conducted a number of focus group discussions with mothers in the
post-puerperium and with health personnel in different locations of the study area
to investigate the prevalence and nature
of women’s perception of maternal morbidity. Secondly, the study used structured interviews to obtain detailed information on the puerperium from mothers
who had just completed that period. The
analysis made in the present paper is
based on the second data source only.

The collection of data from 600 mothers using structured interview schedules
was done within one week following their
puerperium (i.e., 43-50 days after the delivery). Identification of mothers for the
interview was carried out by the research
team’ with the assistance of 24 research
assistants (enumerators) who had received
special training* from a number of experts
before the field work. Identification of
mothers was done by using the Public
Health Midwives* (PHM’s) registers in se
*The research team was comprised of three experts,
a principal investigator and two coinvestigators. The
principal investigator was a population and health expert, and the coinvestigators were experts on sociology
and medical science respectively.

‘Female health volunteers of the Kalutara district
were selected and trained as the enumerators for the
field work. They all had at least ten years of schooling,
and in fact some had a university education. Training of
enumerators lasted one week, which included formal
lectures and training in the field sites. During the training it was emphasized how to use the questionnaire to
obtain relevant information on socioeconomic status,
maternal morbidity, and health-seeking behavior from
the mothers.

‘Registration of pregnant mothers in her area during
home visits within the first four months of pregnancy is

Puerperal Morbidity

225

lected areas of Kalutara district. The district is located about 50 km south of the
capital city of Colombo and represents
many socioeconomic characteristics of Sri
Lankan society. The respondents were selected from the three Medical Officers of
Health (MOH) areas,° namely, Kalutara,
Beruwala, and Matugama, in the Kalutara
district (Table 1).

The three MOH areas altogether comprise 105 PHM areas, and each enumerator selected for the study was required to
cover 3-5 PHM areas. Each enumerator
was first asked to make a primary visit to
each mother identified by the PHM’s register and to check for her availability for
the interview. A minimum of three visits
was made to locate a mother. If she had
moved to her parent’s place or elsewhere,
attempts were made to obtain her new address and to locate her. The enumerators
continued to identify mothers for the
study using the eligibility criteria given to
them until each enumerator identified and
interviewed approximately 25 mothers
from the allocated PHM areas for the
purpose.

According to the eligibility criteria,
the mother had to satisfy three conditions
in order to be selected for the interview.

considered as one of the main duties of the Public
Health Midwife (PHM) in Sri Lanka. The PHM,
through systematic home visits, should also provide
care to pregnant and postpartum mothers and to newborns in their respective PHM areas. The PHM is the
“front line” health worker who provides home health
care, who also distributes oral pills and condoms, and

-who regularly follows-up family planning users and as
sists at MCH clinics.

‘Of the three MOH areas where the study was conducted, the first two come under the supervision of the
National Institute of Health Sciences of Sri Lanka
(NIHS). Mothers in the MOH area of Kalutara, despite
having a large general hospital, are served by a larger
number of private health providers than the mothers in
the BeruwalJa and Matugama MOH areas which can be
categorized as semi-urban and rural respectively.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

226 De Silva Social Biology
TABLE 1
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE STUDY AREA AND NUMBER
OF POSTPARTUM MOTHERS SUCCESSFULLY INTERVIEWED
NUMBER OF PHM“
MOH AREA POPULATION AVERAGE NUMBER OF
IN KALUTARA 1996 Approved Number in POPULATION MOTHERS
Distric™ (MID-YEAR) Cadre Position PER PHM INTERVIEWED
Kalutara (Urban) ............cccccesseeees 100,759 27 25 4,030 217
Beruwala (Semi urban) ............... 139,015 43 Al 3,391 162
Matugama (Rural)............:scesesees 100,218 35 32 3,132 217
Total.........cccccccscsscccsccsescsscescesens 339,992 105 98 3,469 596

“MOH, Medical Officer of Health; PHM, Public Health Midwife.

First, she had to have a live birth about
43-50 days before the intended date of
interview. Secondly, the child had to be
alive’ at the time of the interview. Thirdly,
the mother had to live currently in the
study area. The selection, location and interviewing of mothers, at the time when
eligible, took place from June to September 1996. The enumeration was not conducted simultaneously in all three MOH
areas because of difficulty in supervision.
Enumerators were given a maximum duration of two months to identify and complete the interviews with the eligible respondents. As a result of migration to

"Mothers whose youngest child died during the 42
days after birth form an interesting group, but in the
study population the number of such mothers was very
small because of low infant mortality in Sri Lanka. A
mother who has lost her child during the puerperium ts
more likely to be suffering from ill health, both physically and psychologically, than a mother whose child is
surviving in the same period. However, because of the
small numbers and the difficulty in interviewing them,
those mothers who lost a child during puerperium were
not included in the study.

During 1996, the infant mortality rate of the study
area was found to be 18 per 1,000 live births. The figure
is comparable with the infant mortality rate of the
whole country. Since the study interviewed about 600
mothers (assuming one live birth per mother), only 11
infant deaths are expected. Since deaths in the first six
weeks of infancy contribute about 60 per cent of the total infant deaths in Sri Lanka, the expected number of
infant deaths to these 600 mothers is further lowered to
about 6 deaths.

their mother’s residence before the delivery and co-residence there for a few
weeks even after the delivery, about 5 per
cent of the eligible mothers could not be
located in the field for enumeration. The
percentage of partial or full refusals were
negligible.

The study attempted to examine demographic, socioeconomic, and pregnancy- and delivery-related determinants
of morbidity condition during the puerperium through univariate and multivariate (ordered logit models) statistical techniques. Particularly, the analysis was
strengthened by developing an “index of
morbidity” which represents each enumerated mother’s level of morbidity during the puerperium.

RESULTS

PREVALENCE OF ILLNESS AND ITS LEVEL
OF SEVERITY

Mothers in general believe that ill
health following childbirth is a natural
phenomenon which requires no professional help. Therefore, an attempt has been
made in the study to collect a range of
puerperal illnesses and symptoms which
are expected to be experienced by any
members of the study population during

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 45, No. 3-4

the puerperium. Since mothers were interviewed just a few days after the end of
the puerperium,’ it is very unlikely that
they have had any major recall bias for
these conditions.

The collection of information on illnesses and symptoms was done by using
two strategies. First, mothers were asked to
self-report (voluntarily) all illnesses and
symptoms that they experienced during the
puerperium along with the level of severity,
i.e., “very serious,” “serious,” or “not serious,” for each reported illness or symptom.
In the second strategy, mothers were questioned about the experience of puerperal
illnesses and symptoms by providing a
brief description of each of the conditions
she had not voluntarily reported. For each
of the illnesses and symptoms reported
through this approach, she was also questioned about the level of its severity. Thus,
reports derived by the first and second
strategies could be called “unprompted”
and “prompted” responses, respectively.

Clearly, the experience of ill health during the puerperium by these mothers is
much higher than expected. With the low
level of maternal mortality’ in Sn Lanka,
one would expect to have a low level of

‘It should be noted that illnesses and symptoms
which mothers experienced during the six-week period
following aff previous births were also collected in the
study. However, at the time of enumeration, it was observed that most mothers tend to underestimate the
morbid conditions that they experienced during the previous puerperal periods. Therefore, the present study
reports the prevalence of illnesses and symptoms experienced during the recent puerperium only. The prevalence of illnesses and symptoms during the previous
puerperium are not discussed.

*The reported maternal mortality ratio of 40 per
100,000 live births in Sri Lanka is one of the lowest in
the developing world. However, researchers believe that
the ratio underestimates the actual level of maternal
mortality in Sri Lanka (De Silva, 19976). This underestimation is due to the intentional misclassification of actual maternal deaths to common gynecological causes

Puerperal Morbidity

227

puerperal morbidity. Of the 596 mothers
successfully interviewed, 40 per cent reported excessive bleeding during the puerperium, 24 per cent in unprompted responses and 16 per cent in prompted
responses (Figure 1). Shivering, breast engorgement, or a painful burning feeling
when urinating was also reported by
slightly more than one-third of the mothers. Pain in the lower abdomen during
puerperium was reported by another onequarter of mothers. In general, about 60
per cent of the mothers who experienced a
specific illness during puerperium reported
the illness without prompting. A question
may arise at this juncture: To what extent
do mothers who report an illness without
prompting differ demographically or socioeconomically from mothers who report
the same with prompting? An analysis
found no significant difference between
these two groups (results are not shown).
Therefore, in the subsequent analysis, the
illnesses and symptoms which have been
obtained from unprompted and prompted
categories are combined and defined as the
total prevalence.

All morbidities can be measured along
a severity continuum which could be
ranged from “nuisance” to “life-threatening.” Naturally, some morbidities are immediately life-threatening, although they
occur in less severe forms, such as the
postpartum hemorrhage (Fortney, 1995).
In the present study we were not able to
assess whether the reported level of

when the deaths actually resulted from complications of
induced abortion. Induced abortion remains illegal in
Sri Lanka, but a significantly large number of pregnancies are terminated by trained and untrained personnel
using both modern and folk methods (De Silva, 1997D).
Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, hemorrhage, sepsis, and anemia are the leading causes of the reported
maternal deaths in Sri Lanka.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

228

Excessive bleeding F™
Shivering Peer ee

Breast engorgement —™
Painful urination

Pain in lower abdomen

10

15

De Silva

Social Biology

 

20 25
Percent

30 35 40 45

@ Prevalence Total mg Prevalence Unprompt

Fic. 1.—Prevalence of illness during the puerperium (all mothers).

severity of each episode was actually lifethreatening. All severe illnesses are not
life-threatening; it primarily depends on
what type of episode we are dealing with.
However, it is the individual’s recognition
of a problem and its level of severity that
largely determine the demand of health
care (Bhatia and Cleland, 1995; Stewart
et al., 1996). In the light of these observations, we collected the severity of each
reported illness or symptom from each
mother. When the level of severity of all
reported illnesses and symptoms was examined, about 30 per cent of all episodes
were identified by mothers as “very serious/serious,” the balance being minor ailments or inconsequential. When only the
most commonly reported illnesses are
considered, about one-quarter of reported
episodes of excessive bleeding and shivering were identified as “very serious/serious” (Figure 2).

Is there any difference in reported illnesses during the puerperium of these
mothers depending on their mode of delivery of last birth? Before answering
such a question, it is worthwhile to examine the distributions of our population of
mothers in respect to the mode of delivery, place of delivery, and the number of
nights spent in the health institution after
the delivery. Of the total 596 deliveries,
only 78 (13 per cent) were caesarean,
while the balance were vaginal deliveries
(87 per cent), including a few cases of
forceps deliveries. Only about 1 per cent
of the total deliveries took place at home
or on the way to delivery institution, with
the balance taking place in some health .
institution (major public hospital, private
hospital to maternity homes). Over 70 per
cent of mothers who had a vaginal delivery for the last birth spent only one night
in the health institution while another 5

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 45, No. 3-4

Excessive bleeding

Shivering

Breast engorgement

Painful urination

Pain in lower abdomen

Puerperal Morbidity

229

 

0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%

Percentage

MiVery serious [1 Serious [] Not serious

Fic. 2.—Seriousness of illness during the puerperium (all mothers).

per cent did not stay even one night there.
In contrast to the vaginal-delivered mothers, those who underwent caesarean sections spent seven nights on average in the
health institution before returning home.
Among the vaginal-delivered mothers
a significantly large proportion (46 per
cent) reported excessive bleeding during
the puerperium. Of those who reported it,
one-quarter felt that it was either “very
serious” or “serious” (Table 2). Over onethird of the vaginal-delivered mothers reported either painful buming feeling
when urinating, or breast engorgement, or
shivering conditions during the puerperium. Mental health status of mothers
during the puerperium is also assessed
through the change in mental make-up,
that is, to identify any level of post-delivery depression. About 6 per cent of vaginal-delivered mothers reported the experience of some degree of change in

 

mental make-up during the puerperium,
and of them over 40 per cent noted the
condition as “very serious” or “serious.”

Among women who underwent caesarean section, between 26 to 30 per cent
reported either pain in lower abdomen, or
painful burning feeling (dysurea) when
urinating, or breast engorgement, or backache (Table 3). Importantly, fever during
the puerperium is also reported by 12 per
cent and 8 per cent of the caesarean-sec
"At the time of field work the enumerators identified two mothers eligible for the detailed interview but
who were experiencing severe postdelivery depression
and therefore had difficulty communicating. Only one
of them was able to describe her morbid conditions
with the assistance of her sister, but the other one was
not. Both of them lost their husbands, who were soldiers fighting against separatists, a few weeks before
the interview. One unmarried eligible mother was also
identified with severe postdelivery depression who
worked as a domestic aid, but the enumerator was able
to interview her at the second visit which was made one
week following the first visit.

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

230

De Silva

 

Social Biology

TABLE 2

Per CENT OF MOTHERS WHO REPORTED ILLNESSES OR PROBLEMS DURING THE SIX-WEEK PERIOD AFTER
DELIVERY OF THEIR LAST BIRTH (VAGINAL-DELIVERED MOTHERS ONLY) BY LEVEL OF SERIOUSNESS?

PER CENT AND NUMBER

REPORTING ILLNESS/PROBLEM LEVEL OF SERIOUSNESS (PER CENT)
ILLNESS/PROBLEM % Number Very serious Serious Not serious

Fever ......eeesscseeecceesseceseeseaceeccecerseseenceensnessenes 7.7 40 7.5 27.5 65.0
Excessive bleeding ............cssscssecssessesssesseeees 45.9 238 2.1 23.1 74.8
Vaginal discharge with bad smell..............06 3.9 20 ee 10.0 90.0
Pain in lower abdomen... cecesseseseeoeees 24.1 125 1.6 24.8 73.6
Difficulty in controlling urine .......... eee 13 8 sie 37.5 62.5
Painful, burning feeling when urinating....... 34.2 177 3.4 25.4 71.2
Change in mental make-up..........:.ssessseeers 5.6 — 29 13.8 27.6 58.6
Breast EngorgemMentt...........cssesssssessersseeseeeees 36.3 188 4.8 26.6 68.6
Infected episiotoMy/tear...........cescssesesesense 2.5 13 7.7 38.5 53.8
Lowering Of WOMD .......csscsssescerenseetseeeeesees 11.0 57 19.3 26.3 54.4
Constipation ..........scecsseseesessenseessenensecsecenees 7.3 38 2.6 36.8 60.5
SIV ETING wccsnnneemcncancneenemanenemenascansconvncwese 38.6 200 5.0 19.0 76.0
Backache .........cscccesesseceesserseseesserserenssceesesees 23.0 119 7.6 31.9 60.5

4In the sample, 518 mothers (87 per cent) out of 596 interviewed had a vaginal delivery of their last birth.

TABLE 3

PER CENT OF MOTHERS WHO REPORTED ILLNESSES OR PROBLEMS DURING THE SIX-WEEK PERIOD
AFTER DELIVERY OF THEIR LAST BIRTH (CAESAREAN-SECTION-DELIVERED MOTHERS ONLY)
BY LEVEL OF SERIOUSNESS?

PER CENT AND NUMBER

REPORTING ILLNESS/PROBLEM

ILLNESS/PROBLEM %
FeVET.......esscsssescescesrsessnscaseeserseasensersensneensesees 11.5
Excessive GSC  scsccescass geecscsecscsscasmremasenezes 2.6
Vaginal discharge with bad smell ................. 6.4
Pain in lower abdomen.............ssssssessesesseeees 28.2
Difficulty in controlling urine ..........csceseeeee 5.1
Painful, burning feeling when urinating ....... 25.6
Change in mental make-up ..........essesseeseeseee 3.8
Breast CNSOrPeMeNE n.ccecensncsisseneseenwenecensnsues 28.2
Infected episiotomy/teat...........eseeeeeseecees 3.8
Lowering Of WOMD............csssessesseteeseeeseesees 16.7
COmstipation .........ssssccsssesseersescererteesetsteeteenees 16.7
SHIVEQING.....seereersseniectsaiessasemeasonnne cmaanvereass 16.7
Bata Che 1.2. sess snsssscnsscencaca scenneseessmne ancassounswnas 295

LEVEL OF SERIOUSNESS (PER CENT)

Number Very serious Serious Not serious
9 cae 22,2 77.8
2 wes 50.0 50.0
5 see 20.0 80.0
22 wee 59.1 40.9

4 wee 75.0 25.0
20 nas 55.0 45.0

3 TT 33.3 66.7
22 See 36.4 63.6

3 ee 66.7 33.3
13 77 46.2 46.2
13 +8: 53.8 46.2
13 7.7 23.1 69.2
23 43 47.8 47.8

“In the sample, 78 mothers (13 per cent) out of 596 interviewed had a caesarean delivery of their last birth.

tion and vaginal-delivered mothers respectively. Significantly, a large minority
among the caesarean-section-delivered
mothers reported either a lowering of
womb, or constipation, or shivering during the puerperium.

Unlike the vaginal-delivered mothers,
the proportion reporting “very serious” illness conditions was lower among the caesarean-section-delivered mothers, who
stayed a relatively longer period of time in
a major health institution than the former.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 45, No. 34

Since health personnel could identify
most of the illnesses of mothers during
the puerperium, particularly when they
are aN in-patient at a health institution,
and thereby provide appropriate treatment
for them, hospitalization might have significantly influenced the reporting of the
prevalent illness and also the level of
severity of each reported condition. Moreover, Caesarean-section-delivered mothers
might have felt more secure as they are in
the hands of more qualified health professionals at a tertiary-level institution for
about a week after the delivery.

Research on maternal morbidity has
tended to focus on complications that are
measured and potentially life-threatening,
but “minor complaints,” such as backache, are rarely addressed even though
such conditions may significantly impair
a woman’s well-being and ability to work
(Liskin, 1992). A study done in Birmingham, UK, which has investigated this
type of problem found that 72 per cent of
primigravidae reported backache which
lasted over six weeks and which started
within three months of delivery (McCarthy and Maine, 1992).

INDEX OF MORBIDITY DURING
PUERPERIUM

How frequently does an illness occur
during the puerperium? Eighty-nine per
cent of mothers reported one or more illness during the puerperium. Thus, only
11 per cent reported no illness during the
same period (Figure 3). Over SO per cent
reported either two or three illnesses. In
fact, about 7 per cent reported more than
five different illnesses.

Supporting the hypothesis made earlier, mothers delivered by caesarean section tend to report fewer numbers of illnesses during the puerperium than

Puerperal Morbidity

231

mothers who had a vaginal delivery (Figure 4). While only 9 per cent of vaginaldelivered mothers reported perfect health
(no illness) during the puerperium, almost
one-quarter of the caesarean section delivered mothers said the same. Number of
illnesses experienced by vaginal-delivered
mothers are generally higher than by the
caesarean-Ssection-delivered mothers. The
vaginal-delivered mothers reported the
experience of 2-3 illnesses more frequently during the puerperium while 2 illnesses was the peak among the caesarean.

During the puerperium, many mothers
suffered with more than one illness and
also with different combinations of illnesses. Some mothers suffered with relatively more important obstetric complications while others with less important
complications. For instance, excessive
bleeding during the puerperium poses a
relatively high risk of dying compared to
backache during the same period. As one
would expect, for the same illness the reported level of severity varies from
mother to mother. Each mother’s overall
health status during the puerperium varies
greatly depending on what type of illness,
and symptoms, she has had and how severe it is. As Graham and Campbell
(1991) noted, the physical condition in
which a woman finds herself as a result of
a recent pregnancy and childbirth can be
thought of as being part of a continuum in
which complete health is at one end of the
spectrum and death is at the other, with
various degrees of ill health and incapacity between them. Therefore, the index of
morbidity is constructed to represent each
mother’s overall level of morbidity during
the puerperium (Table 4).

Instead of examining only one specific
illness, say excessive bleeding, suffered
during the puerperium, we would find it
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

232 De Silva Social Biology

Percent of mothers

Percent of mothers

 

0 1 2 3 4 5+
Number of illnesses

Fic. 3.—Illness experience during the puerperium (all mothers).

30 
9 Vaginal

 

25 etd in mcs
20 15

10

 

Number of Illnesses

Fic. 4.—Ilness experience during the puerperium (vaginal and caesarean mothers).
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 45, No. 3-4

Puerperal Morbidity

233

TABLE 4
CONSTRUCTION OF THE INDEX OF MORBIDITY DURING PUERPERIUM?

LEVEL OF SEVERITY REPORTED
SCORE

ILLNESS/PROBLEM REPORTED

ILLNESS/PROBLEM

Excessive bleeding 0.0... cesscescsssesressescsrseeretcnnees
Vaginal discharge with bad smell... cee esesseeee
Pain in lower abdomen ..............:sssssssseeseessseeseesenes
Difficulty in controlling urine 0.0... eeeeereeee
Painful, burning feeling when urinating................
Change in mental maK@-tip cccsmernnsssstecinensencanenn
Breast EngorgeMentt.........ccscssccesssscsesssecereoreecersese
Infected episiotOMy/tear..........ceseecssesceseseeeeeseees
LOWEEING OF WOT pp cag cactensacsrsscesessoctscanacssnsenzomesasa
CONnSti pation ssicsncusnnvsnnscnascecneresnemoassnavesancussannasesne
PEE RE parr nenrearrscecsectanononresrmeee somone cameneRENSE EET
|S Fie) 42.) 0

SCORE Very serious Serious Not serious

Ema

See eB NONNNN DN WW W WD
WWW WWW OW WW WW Ww
NNNNNNNNNNN WN VY
Pee eee ee ee

“Each mother has received 4 value to represent her level of morbidity. For instance, a mother who reported fever (serious) and breast engorgement (not serious) received a value of 8 as her index of morbidity (3X2 + 2X1).

more useful to examine a whole spectrum
of illnesses and symptoms which represent each mothers’ overall health status
during this period. Since many women
suffered different types of illnesses with
different levels of severity, the weights
that should be given to specific illnesses
became a difficult question to resolve.
Therefore, a couple of obstetricians and
nursing sisters in the study area were requested to provide their own weights for
each illness and symptom reported, as
shown in Table 4. After assessing the responses received, we developed a set of
weights to represent each illness and
symptom, and those values are also
shown in Table 4. For instance, fever, excessive bleeding, vaginal discharge with
bad smell, pain in lower abdomen, and
difficulty in controlling urine, all are
grouped into a most important category
and each received a value of three. IIlnesses and symptoms which are relatively less important are grouped into a
least important category, and each was
given a value of one. The level of severity

was weighted as three, two, and one, in
order to represent the “very serious,” “serious,” and “not serious” categories respectively.

Each mother, depending on the illnesses and symptoms which she reported
and their level of severity, received a single value to represent her level of morbidity during the puerperium. For instance, a mother who reported fever
(level = “serious”) and breast engorgement (level = “not serious’) received a
value of eight as her index of morbidity
(3X2 + 2X1). Theoretically, the index
should range from 0-81 (zero being no
illness; 81 being highest morbid condition). However, the observed values of
the index ranges from 0-45 only (Figure
5). The observed distribution of the index
closely follows a chi-square distribution.

Which illness contributed relatively
more to the overall index of the puerperal
morbidity? Excessive bleeding made the
highest contribution (24 per cent) to the
overall value of the index (Figure 6). Pain
in lower abdomen, breast engorgement,

 
 

234 De Silva Social Biology

No. of mothers

 

Morbidity Index

Fic. 5.—Distribution of mothers by index of morbidity.

Ex. bleeding

Pain in lower
abdomen

Breast
engorgement

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Painful urination

Shivering

 

0 5 10 15 20 20
Percent

Fic. 6.—Contribution of specific illnesses to the index of morbidity (all mothers).
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 45, No. 3-4

and a painful burning feeling when urinating, each contributed 15 per cent of
the overall index and thus the burden of
ill health among the mothers during the
puerperium was largely the result of these
illnesses.

DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

Who are the mothers belonging to the
high morbid category compared with the
moderate and low morbid categories? Are
they different demographically and socioeconomically? Do they differ in their pregnancies and delivery-related conditions? To
answer these questions, we categorize the
distribution of the index of morbidity into a
few logically appropriate groups.

The categorization of the index was
attempted by considering a couple of important points and options: categorization
of mothers into 3 or 4 equal-size groups
by using the distribution of the index
(Figure 5); the median value of 6.0 in the
observed distribution; and over 30 per
cent of mothers reporting either “very serious” or “serious” illnesses during the
puerperium. The final categorization was
made by using a trade-off between different options, as shown in Table 5. Mothers
were categorized into three groups; low
morbid, moderately morbid, and high
morbid. Mothers who had received the
index values of 0-2 were assigned as low
morbid; those who received 9 or more index values, high morbid; and the balance,
moderately morbid. Nearly 20 per cent
and 31 per cent of mothers were grouped
into the low-morbid and high-morbid categories respectively.

DEMOGRAPHIC VARIABLES

How did mother’s age, age difference
of spouses, and parity affect the level of
morbidity? Mothers who are younger, say

Puerperal Morbidity

235

TABLE 5

DISTRIBUTION OF MOTHERS BY THEIR
LEVEL OF MorgipiTy?

INDEX OF MoretptTy (CATEGORIZATION)

MODE OF Low Moderate High

DELIVERY (0-2) (3-8) (9+) All N
Vaginal.......... 17.2 51.0 31.9 100.0 518
Caesarean...... 37.2 39.7 23.1 100.0 78
AIL... eeeeeesseeens 19.8 49.5 30.7 100.0 596
DG wnnenrasascsnncan 118 295 183 596

“Median value of the original distribution of index of morbidity
= 6.00.

less than 25 years, had the highest level
of morbidity compared with the others.
Significantly, a strong relationship in
morbidity was observed when the age
difference of spouses was examined.
Mothers who are older than their spouses
were observed to be more morbid than
the mothers whose spouses were in the
same age group or younger (Table 6). A
relatively larger proportion of mothers
who experienced one or more pregnancy
wastage were identified in the high-morbid category than of mothers who had not
experienced any pregnancy wastage.
Nearly 44 per cent of the mothers in our
study population had been identified as
primigravidae (last column of Table 6).
Since Sn Lanka has already achieved replacement-level fertility,"' the study population was expected to be comprised of
nearly one-half of primigravidae mothers.
Mothers with four or more births were
found to be only 9 per cent. Primigravidae
mothers represent a higher level of morbidity during the puerperium than the others.

"Sri Lanka has recently experienced transitions in
major demographic phenomena and is now at the important stage of the fertility transition where it seems to
be heading even below the replacement level. Sri Lanka
is the first country in the South Asia subregion to record
such a low level of fertility (De Silva, 1994).

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

236

De Silva

Social Biology

TABLE 6

PER CENT DISTRIBUTION OF MOTHERS BY LEVEL OF MorRBIDITY (LOW, MODERATE AND HIGH)
AND SELECTED VARIABLES

Variable Low (0-2)
Current age (mother)
LO veanernnersoneenaneenevne Siunernnaneeseenerneennns 12.0
DOA SA csiiesanigyerccnesennsKeWiseesésbseaseNseNGegenee 20.0
BS ssvesnanvassaweesanisanmsanwnnaxanveccsnennaasees 24,3
Age difference
Mother > Fathet............:sseeereeseereee 12.0
Mother = Father.............ccsescssesseseees 29.7
Mother < Father............ccccescssessseeees 18.9
Pregnancy loss?
WES seavevecerec enn envarieasnamisuenreeeneiwit anne ta
NO srcssnscnasscivessceosenomnamnamancemanunacees 21.0
Parity”
L oeeeceesscescesescescncencerettennereeseresseerneesees 19.3
2D nimi 20.1
8h  cassancanesnnesncascnensaumnaemnannnnmsannarenmsses 20.4
Duration of labor
NO labor... eeceesetcneeereetscscecesecesees 44.6
STD OUTS snare sponene'é isthinns BAiAFERR epee 16.1
V2 NOS es cece scarvenvarwencenemereenenenianeas 17.1
Mode of delivery & use of hands to
remove placenta‘®
Vag delivery, hands used ............00 222
Vag delivery, hands not used............. 16.5
CAGSAYESMN «.....ascsnessssusvenssnsxanwessatsesscons ai
Birth weight of last child
Low (<2500)......cccescessessenceeceeccseeeers 23.2
Average (2500-2999)... ecssesesseeene 20.2
High (3000+)... esscecseceeceseeseneesene 18.0
Education*
Prirary (14 yeas \isesssnesxesncmnexsaneans 19.3
Secondary (5-9 years)... cesses 18.1
Higher (LO+ years) ........cecscessessesseee 20.6
Religion’
Buddhist .........cccccsscesesseeterseecerssseneeess 16.6
MUSHIM oo... cceccsssceseesenseeeesreeeereasenssees 29.3
Other (Hindu/R.C.).......cccscecescssecesees 30.3
Mother’s usual residence®
UP Dat scssccen.ssis cn nnasacaraarcenenemnecnnsese 26.7
0 ETE GN rescccresresenennsrecsseoneaceneeasmnains 19.8
Rural .....cececcesccseeesecceseeccesonsenenterseees 12.9
Any say on h.h. expenditure
Yes (always/sometimes) ..........:sccecees 20.6
ING... scsamnsapagiuynre manages arse asian 18.1
“5<0.10.
’n<0.05.
“p<0.01.

Mothers were also questioned about
their fertility desires, making specific reference to the time of last conception leading
to the last birth. Mothers who indicated

Moderate (3-8) High (9+) Number %
56.0 32.0 50 8.4
48.3 31.7 476 79.9
52.9 22.9 70 11.7
40.0 48.0 25 4,2
45.3 25.0 64 10.7
$0.5 30.6 507 85.1
48.1 44.2 52 8.7
49.6 29.4 544 91.3
47.1 33.6 259 43.5
51.6 28.3 283 47.5
50.0 29.6 54 9.1
36.5 18.9 74 12.4
52.3 31.9 417 70.0
47.6 35.2 105 17.6
46.0 31.7 63 10.6
51.6 31.9 455 76.3
39.7 23.1 78 13.1
49.5 27.3 99 16.6
49.6 30.2 258 43.3
49.4 32.6 239 40.1
38.6 42.0 88 14.8
49.7 32.2 149 25.0
52.1 27.3 359 60.2
51.0 32.4 447 75.0
46.5 24.2 99 16.6
42.0 28.0 50 8.4
52.5 20.7 217 36.4
47.5 32.7 162 27.2
47.9 39.2 217 36.4
51.4 28.0 403 67.6
45.6 36.3 193 32.4

that they were not expecting any child or
wanted to delay their childbearing at that
time identified with a relatively high level
of morbidity as contrasted with mothers
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 45, No. 3-4

who were happy to conceive and have a
child. Mothers who claimed that their last
child (or first child) was unwanted could
provide some indication of dissatisfaction
on their reproductive behavior and that
seems to increase morbidity risk during
the puerperium (not shown in Table 6).

DELIVERY-RELATED VARIABLES

As reported in Table 6, 70 per cent of
the mothers had experienced less than 12
hours of labor while 18 per cent experienced 12 or more hours. A relatively
small proportion of mothers reported no
labor before the delivery; almost all of
these mothers had undergone caesarean
section delivery. Mothers who experienced long labor (12 or more hours)
clearly demonstrated a higher level of
morbidity during the puerperium than the
others. Another delivery complication investigated, heavy bleeding during delivery, Shows the expected pattern but without any statistical significance (not shown
in Table 6).

The mothers who were hospitalized
any time during the last pregnancy provide a clue to the level of complications
experienced during that time. However,
hospitalization was not strongly related to
the complications experienced during the
puerperium. No clear pattern existed
through the three levels of morbidity and
hospitalization during pregnancy. Presumably, most of the pregnancy-related
critical complications disappeared with
the delivery (not shown in Table 6).

In a developing country, delivery practices are expected to influence morbidity
during the puerperium. For instance, use
of unclean hands to remove the placenta
manually may cause infection during the
puerperium. Since caesarean-section deliveries are usually performed in a hy
Puerperal Morbidity

237

gienic environment, additional information was obtained only from the vaginaldelivered mothers. We asked whether after the delivery of the child, hands were
used to remove the placenta manually.
This information for vaginal-delivered
mothers is used along with the caesareansection mothers as a composite variable
to examine the possible association with
morbidity during the puerperium. Among
the vaginal-delivered, the use of hands
had no association with the level of morbidity. However, it is the caesarean-section-delivered mothers who reported a
significantly lower level of puerperal
morbidity than both groups of vaginaldelivered mothers.

Facilities and trained staff at a maternity unit could also influence the level of
puerperal morbidity. About three-quarters
of the total deliveries in the study population took place in a tertiary level institution, including a small proportion of deliveries in private institutions. Home
deliveries are remarkably low in Sri
Lanka,” and in the study population only
5 deliveries were reported as such. Mothers who delivered at tertiary level hospitals show a lower morbid condition than
the mothers who delivered in any other
institution (not shown in Table 6).

A pregnancy outcome variable, the
birth weight of child, was also used to
examine any possible association between the level of morbidity in the puerperium. Mothers who delivered a large
child, say 3000 gm or more, were found
to be reporting a higher morbidity rate

"On average, 85 per cent of the total registered
births in Sri Lanka occur in government medical institutions, while only 33 per cent of all births in India are attended by trained birth attendants or medica! personnel
(Grant, 1988).

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

238

during the puerperium than mothers who
delivered an average-size child or even
a low-birth-weight (<2500 gm) child
(Table 6).

SOCIOECONOMIC VARIABLES

As expected, among socioeconomic
variables selected, mothers who are less
educated and who live in rural areas show
relatively high morbidity compared to
their better-educated and urban counterparts (Table 5). The percentage of household’s monthly income spent on food was
considered as an income proxy;" 21 per
cent of the households in the study population were identified as poor, and mothers of these households in_ general
showed a moderate or high level of morbidity compared to the other mothers. A
few more economic indicators such as income, mother’s employment status, and
type of occupation, have been used in the
analysis but demonstrated no significant
association with the level of morbidity
(not shown in Table 5).

Mother’s overall status in the household was assessed by asking a simple
question on “Whether she had any say on
household’s day-to-day expenses?” Mothers who have very little or no say on
household expenditure could be categorized as “poor status” and the balance as
“better status.” Mothers who belong to
the “poor status” group showed a higher
morbidity level than those who were of
“better status.” Even though Buddhism

“According to the World Bank study on poverty in
Sri Lanka, about 20 per cent of households are identified as living below the poverty level (World Bank,
1995). The study used a couple of socioeconomic parameters, including the percentage of household’s average
income spent on food, to measure the level of poverty.
In the present study, households which spent over 80
per cent of income on food are defined as living in
poverty.

De Silva

Social Biology

provides a better status for women than
some other religious groups, in our study
population Buddhist mothers had a
higher morbidity rate than mothers in
other religious groups. Muslim mothers
were least affected by ill health during
the puerperium (Table 5).

A custom practiced in Sri Lanka, and
also observed in many South Asian countries, is for a woman at a later stage of
pregnancy to move to her parents’ home
to stay a few weeks there after the delivery. This practice is common in rural
populations and particularly among primigravidae mothers. Mothers who moved
to their parents’ home indicated a relatively higher level of puerperal morbidity
than those who stayed in their own residence (not shown in Table 6), although
the association was not statistically significant. There may be other types of
causal relationships. Mothers who suffered more ill health during pregnancy
and delivery might have been brought to
their parents’ home for better care. It
should be noted that our study population
comprises a large proportion of primigravidae, and they usually had a higher
level of ill health during the puerperium
than the others.

MULTIVARIATE ANALYSIS

Even though the association between
demographic, socioeconomic, and delivery-related variables and the level of ill
health among mothers in the puerperium
can be investigated in tabular form, a multivariate analysis can assess the independent effects of one or another variable after
controlling for others. As an appropriate
multivariate technique to represent our dependent variable, an ordered logit model is
selected. It is used to estimate relationships
between an ordinal dependent variable
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 45, No. 3-4

and a set of selected independent variables. An ordinal variable is a variable
that is categorical and ordered. When the
dependent variable is categorical and ordered, logits can directly incorporate the
ordering which results in models having
simpler interpretations and potentially
greater power than ordinary multicategory logit models (McCullagh, 1980;
Greenland, 1985).

The dependent variable used in the ordered logit model is categorized as low,
moderate, and high morbidity. The effect
of each independent variable on the dependent variable is estimated by the odds
ratio for each variable category relative to
the reference category which has the odds
ratio of one. In Model 1, only one set of
selected demographic variables were regressed with the dependent (response)
variable, and in Model 2, apart from the
demographic variables, a set of pregnancy
and delivery related variables were added
to the model. In the final model, along
with all the variables used in Model 2, a
set of variables which represent mothers’
socioeconomic situation is also added.
Most of the relationships we observed in
the descriptive analysis remain substantially unchanged, particularly their direction of impact, when they are reassessed
in the ordered logit model (Table 7).

It is worthwhile to note that even
though a key demographic variable such
as age of the mother shows no significant
association with the level of puerperal
morbidity, it is included in all three models because of its theoretical importance.
Younger mothers in all models tend to
have higher morbid conditions than others. Only one other variable (mode of delivery and use of hands to remove placenta), even though not significant, was
included in the models.

Puerperal Morbidity

239

In the final model, age differences between spouses, controlling for all other
variables, indicate a significantly strong
association with puerperal morbidity.
Mothers who are older than their spouses
were found to be more highly morbid
than the others (Table 7). Among the demographic variables, parity indicates the
careful monitoring of health among the
primigravidae since they have the highest
morbid condition during the puerperium
than any other gravidae. The logit model
results confirm the importance of identification of mothers who experienced any
pregnancy loss since they suffer more
heavily during the puerperium than those
who had no such experience. Mothers
who had long labor had significantly
higher morbidity than others. Also mothers who delivered relatively large babies
(3000 gm or more) demonstrate higher
morbidity than mothers who delivered
low-birth-weight children.

Even after controlling for demographic
delivery-related variables, we find that a
set of socioeconomic variables regressed
in the final model show a strong relation
with the response variable. As is expected,
less-educated mothers or those living in a
rural locality tend to report higher morbidity than mothers who are better educated
or living in an urban locality, which may
be due to cultural practices or to other reasons. Mothers who adhere to Buddhism
clearly experienced worse morbidity during the puerperium than Muslim, Hindu,
or Roman Catholic mothers.

DISCUSSION AND POLICY
IMPLICATIONS

Care during the puerperium receives
less research attention than antepartum or
intrapartum care in many developing

 

 
240 De Silva Social Biology
TABLE 7
LoaiT REGRESSION MODEL RESULTS (Opps RATIOS) OF PUERPERAL MORBIDITY
Variables Reference group Model J Mode! 2 Model 3
Demographic variables
Current age (Mother)........cccseceesserees <25 am oa sea
DOB... vereerersenietiannenssanacontstuesiinientn 0.87 0.92 0.88
SET cca sesnnacanececmmnunasmmaonvanmenssannss 9 a 0.57 0.63 0.82
Ae CTC ncncccnemeesemenmsoenvenoenemens Mother>Father wee see see
Mother = Father ...........csscesesseeees 0.284 0.274 0.25¢
Mother < Father .......sssecsesseeseeseeees ve 0.454 0.45° 0.434
PGs ceenenrenreneeneestetinniedpiapicnnsianicabecen 1 (primipara)
DB sesessensesscecersessecsssesecsesserscseensesees _ 0.85 0.80 0.74°
= ST sacra sensi esit eneaa ce wes 0.98 0.86 0.72
by Pregnancy LOSS. csscscsmncussnesesrenrenensenses None
2 YES .ceccsssssssssseseccscssssesssvecsessesessssnasees 2.246 2.44% 2.077
5 Preg. and delivery variables
(Cy) Duration Of Mab? siccicsnacssennsescansannsnsns None we ain
CO KAZ HOUTS woe eee eeeeeteeneeeeee 2.874 2.544
SADA OUTS sssssssseseseeeeesssnneeeennnsnnes 3.054 2.617
st Mode of delivery and use of
6° hands to remove placenta.............004 Vag. delivery, hands used sn sou
2 Vag. delivery, hands not used......... _ 0.94 0.97
— Caesarean (CS)... .cccccccscssesersenee bee 0.81 0.90
& Birth weight of last child............seses00 Low (<2500) ves vee
29 Average (2500-2999).......csssssesceses ee 1.14 1.19
5 High (3000 +)......cccccssessesseesecssssseene 1.43 1.646
= Sociceconomic variables
° Education (MOtHET) ......seceessersersenrereee Primary (1-4 years) we
= Secondary (5-9 yearS)......cccseeeeee sus 0.72
f Higher (10+ years) ...sesscsessesseseeseeee ves 0.56°
& Religion (Mother) wsiscccccurecensnrasnasnens Buddhist oe
Fo MUSIIM occ ecesesecesesessereasecsecseasences 0.474
P Other (Hindw/R.C.) 00... eeeeeeeteeeeeees wee 0.62°
a Mother’s usual residence..........eseseeees Urban eee
me RCNA OT cay sees cepsranpeeavsnscccssescnacse 1.687
3 RUTal......ccssesccssesscsessessetencsecsseseeetens 1.824
= Log likelihood 2.0... ee eeeceeeeseeceeceeseee — 604.90 —590.59  —576.85
. 4n<0.001.
Q 'n<0.05.
“p<0,10.

countries, in spite of the fact that this is
the period where the majority of maternal
deaths occur. Thus, special efforts are
needed to provide useful information to
health planners and policy makers so that
appropriate strategies can be designed to
bring about improved maternal health.
Most studies on maternal morbidity in
developing countries, including Sri Lanka,

 

are based on information collected from
health institutions such as clinics or hospitals. They are largely studies of single
morbidities (Howard, 1987), because maternal health has always been considered a
domain of clinical specialists and not an
epidemiological or social issue (Bhatia
and Cleland, 1995). However, unlike during the antenatal period, many mothers in
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 45, No. 3-4

the developing world do not visit such facilities for treatment or consultation of
their puerperal illnesses or problems.
Thus, the results of such studies tell us
nothing about incidence or prevalence of
conditions at the community level and
furthermore can seriously distort the
overall picture (Fortney, 1995). With
these points in view, the present study on
self-reported illnesses and symptoms of
puerperal morbidity was undertaken in
1996 in three MOH areas in Kalutara district of Sri Lanka.

This is a prospective study of a cohort
of 600 delivered mothers identified
through PHM’s registers and thus involves no sampling problems and represents in principle an ideal approach for
collecting information on maternal health.
In the Sri Lankan setting, the organization
and implementation of this type of
prospective study is relatively convenient
because almost all pregnant women are
registered by the resident PHM’s in their
respective areas in Sri Lanka.

Even though the measurement instruments of maternal health at the community level are improving, clearly the
prevalence of maternal morbidity needs
to be assessed through reports of mothers’ experiences in a community setting.
Medical professionals may criticize this
approach on the grounds that there is no
precise correspondence between self-reported symptoms and clinical diagnoses.
But it is the recognition of a problem, its
perceived causes, and feared outcome
rather than a sophisticated medical diagnosis which generally determine how a
disease will be managed by the patient
(Bhatia and Cleland, 1996). Thus, demand for and utilization of services will

depend on subjective perception. Such in
formation is necessary for tailoring health

 

Puerperal Morbidity 241

programs to address women’s health
needs effectively (El-Mouelhy et al.,
1994; Paolisso and Leslie, 1995).

The study has demonstrated that levels
of morbidity associated with childbearing
among mothers in Sri Lanka 1s very high.
The observed levels are much higher than
one would expect in the low maternal
mortality setting of Sn Lanka. The observation that 89 per cent of mothers ‘suffer
one or more symptoms of ill health during
the puerperium suggests that there is an
urgent need to strengthen maternal health
care immediately following a birth.

Many studies from developing as well
as developed countries tend to recognize
the high prevalence of ill health during
the puerperium. For instance, the crosssectional community-based study conducted in Giza, Egypt, showed that 56
per cent of 508 women examined had
demonstrable prolapse (Younis et al.,
1993). Another study in Birmingham,
UK, of health after childbirth, found that
the number of women suffering significantly ill health as a consequence of delivery was as high as 64 per cent
(MacArthur et al., 1991). A more recent
study done in Bangladesh by _ the
Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee (Goodburn et al., 1994) and the London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine reported that during the two
weeks after delivery 92 per cent of mothers suffer some episode of ill health.

In the present study, many morbidities
are common. Of the total 596 mothers
successfully interviewed, 40 per cent had
excessive bleeding. Shivering, breast engorgement, or a painful burning feeling
when urinating was reported by almost
one-third of mothers. Of the total reported
episodes of illness during the puerperium
about 30 per cent were noted as either

 
 

242

“very serious” or “serious.” Of mothers
who recognized such serious illnesses, a
considerable proportion did not seek professional care for those problems.
Socioeconomic environment or/and
knowledge, attitude, and practices during
the period of maternity might have influenced mothers to refrain from seeking
professional care. Thus, in these situawn tions it may require a different kind of inStervention to increase use of services.
‘; The study also demonstrates the impor€ tance of morbidities given little promt5 nence in medical research and writing, in
particular bleeding problems and breast
& problems. These morbidities were re¥ ported by significant number of mothers
©? in the study and thus there is considerable
3 scope for early postpartum care in the de'§ tection of these problems.

oD e 2 ge
‘<A higher level of puerperal morbidity
S was expected following caesarean sections

¢_ since these mothers have more pregnancy
© complications than those who had vaginal
g deliveries. This pattern did not emerge. A
z ° week of in-patient care in a sophisticated
5 = medical environment with a built-in treat‘>,ment process seems to have reduced the
s overall burden of ill health during the
‘3 puerperium among these mothers as opposed to the vaginal-delivered mothers
2 who returned home after a relatively short
A period of hospital stay. It is more likely
that those women undergoing caesarean
section (13 per cent of total deliveries) received appropriate care for most of the
complications arising during a one-week
stay in major hospitals, regardless of
whether or not the mother was informed
of such complications (Fortney and Smith,
1996). Moreover, almost all the vaginaldelivered mothers in our study indicated
that they did not wish to stay in the hospital longer after delivery because of their

De Silva

Social Biology

family responsibilities and the lack of
good services for them in the hospital.

The multivariate analysis demonstrates a number of associations that are
potentially important. Mothers who experienced pregnancy wastage or primigravidae are likely to suffer more than the others. Irrespective of their current age,
mothers who are older than their spouses
also have a relatively high risk of ill
health. The high female age at marriage
in Sri Lanka, which now stands at almost
26 years (De Silva, 1997a), demonstrates
the relative importance of this issue.

Mothers were more likely to have
problems and infections during the puerperium if labor had been prolonged. If labor had been prolonged, the birth attendant might have used her hands also to
manipulate the baby, resulting in puerperal infection. Supporting this link, we
observed a positive association between
the duration of labor and the overall burden of ill health among our study population. Apart from provision of antibiotics,
there is a need to improve community
awareness of obstetric emergencies and
the importance of a referral system.

The study reported only one outcome
related to the child, the birthweight,
which is readily available to interviewers
since almost all births were institutional.
The proportion of low-birthweight children in Sri Lanka (18 per cent) reported
in the 1993 Demographic and Health
Survey (Department of Census and Statistics, 1995) is highly comparable with
the estimate of 17 per cent in the present
study. However, it was not the low birthweight which seems to influence ill
health. More attention should be given to
mothers who produced a relatively large
child than those who had an averageweight or under-weight child.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 45, No. 3-4

Strong association between puerperal
morbidity and the socioeconomic status
of mothers was identified. Mothers who
are less educated or living in a rural locality should receive more attention since
they seem to lack the power and resources to maintain their health, particularly during this vulnerable period of
time. It is more likely these mothers are
less well nourished than those who are
educated or living in an urban environment. It may be poor nutrition” per se, or
other factors associated with poor nutrition, that makes mothers vulnerable to ill
health, rather than factors associated with
socioeconomic status such as quality of
housing or household amenities. However, it should be noted that compared
with Muslim and also with Hindu/Roman
Catholic mothers, the Buddhist mothers
report the worst scenario. Presumably,
this finding could be related to higher
malnutrition among Buddhist mothers
than the others and also to cultural practices which may have sapped their
strength to fight against illness during the
puerperium.

Mothers who are reported to be severely morbid during the puerperium
have been identified in the present analysis, and therefore appropriate interventions could be formulated to reduce the
burden of ill health among them during

“Anemia among pregnant and lactating mothers is
found to be over 60 per cent in Sri Lanka, and the clinical data of the study area were no different from the national estimates (De Silva, 1993). Many mothers know
that they ought to eat vegetables, fruits, fish, meat and
drink milk during the pregnancy and lactating period,
but whether they can do so or not depends on their
household income.

Puerperal Morbidity

243

this period. It is well recognized that to
reduce maternal mortality and sequelae
of morbidities, women must be treated
for morbidities that arise. Some of the
conditions we observed may not endanger the life of the mother, but if untreated, often result in severe gynecological or reproductive health problems.
There is a need to strengthen follow-up
services to reach recently delivered mothers and also to develop better strategies to
provide emergency care to women in difficult and complicated long labors. It is
an appropriate time to look beyond antenatal care and to develop strategies for
the promotion of accessible postpartum
care through the already well-established
MCH system in Sri Lanka.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Financial support for the study was received through the Special Programme of Research, Development, and Research Training
in Human Reproduction, World Health Organization, Geneva, and through a Fulbright Fellowship from the Council for International
Exchange of Scholars, Washington, D.C. I
deeply appreciate the comments and assistance of Drs. Allan Hill, Michael Reich, Iain
Aiken, Carla Obermeyer, and Grace Wyshak
of the Harvard School of Public Health and
also of the WHO technical consultants John
Cleland, Iqbal Shah, and Shireen Jejeebhoy.

 
 

244

De Silva

 

Social Biology

REFERENCES

BANG, R., A. BANG, M. BAITULE, Y. CHAUDHARY, Y.
SARMUKADDAMS, and QO. T. TALE. 1989. High
prevalence of gynecological diseases in rural Indian women. Lancet 1:85—88.

BHATIA, J. C., and J. CLELAND. 1996. Obstetric morbidity in South India: Results from a community
survey. Soc. Sci. Med. 43(10):1507-1516.

. 1995. Self-reported symptoms of gynecological morbidity and their treatment in South
India. Stud. Fam. Plan. 26(4):203-216.

Brapy, M., and B. WINIKOFF. 1992. Rethinking
postpartum health care. The Population Council,
New York.

CAMPBELL, O. M. R., and W. J. GRAHAM. 1991.
Measuring the determinants of maternal morbidity and mortality: Defining and selecting outcomes and determinants, and demonstrating associations. Publication No. 4. London School of
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London.

DatTa, K. K., R. S. SHARMA, P. M. A. RAZACK, T.
K. GHosH, and R. R. ARORA. 1980. Morbidity
patterns among rural pregnant women in Alwar,
Rajasthan: A cohort study. Hlth. Pop. Persp. Iss.
3(4):282-292.

DE Siva, W. I. 1997a. The Ireland of Asia: Trends
in marriage timing in Sri Lanka. Asia-Pacific
Pop. 12(2):3-24.

. 1997b, The practice of induced abortion in

Sri Lanka. Paper presented at the Harvard

School of Public Health, Boston, 21 April.

. 1994. Ahead of target: Achievement of re
placement level fertility in Sri Lanka before the

year 2000. Asia-Pacific Pop. 9(4):3—-22.

. 1993. Prevalence and consequences of iron
deficiency anaemia in pregnancy. Paper presented at a Consultative Meeting on Anaemia in
Pregnancy, 29-30 November, Colombo.

DEPARTMENT OF CENSUS AND STATISTICS. 1995. Demographic and Health Survey 1993, Sri Lanka,
Colombo.

EL-MovugELHy, M., M. EL-HELW, N. Younis, H.
KHATTAB, and H. ZURAYK. 1994. Women’s understanding of pregnancy-related morbidity in
rural Egypt. Reprod. Hith. Matters 4:27~34.

Fortney, J. A. 1995. Reproductive morbidity: A
conceptual framework. Working Paper No.
95-02, Family Health International, Research
Triangle Park, NC.

ForTNEY, J. A., and J. B. SmrtH. 1996. The base of the
iceberg: Prevalence and perceptions of maternal
morbidity in four developing countries. Family
Health International, Research Triangle Park, NC.

GRANT, J. P. 1988. The state of the world’s children.
UNICEF, Geneva.

Goopsurn, E. A., M. CHowpuury, R. Gazi, T.
MARSHALL, W. GRAHAM, and F. KARIM. 1994.
Maternal morbidity in rural Bangladesh: An investigation into the nature and determinants of
maternal morbidity related to delivery and the
puerperium. Dhaka Research and Evaluation

 

 

 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Division, BRAC, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London.

GRAHAM, W., and O. M. R. CAMPBELL. 1991. Measuring maternal health: Defining the issues. Report No. 1, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London.

GREENLAND, S. 1985. An application of logistic
model to the analysis of ordinal responses. Biomet. J. 27:189-197.

GUMBER, A., and L. C. CHEN. 1996. Measurement,
seasonality and clustering of morbidity: Some
correlates from a longitudinal study in rural
Bangladesh. Working Paper No. 77, Gujarat Institute of Development, Ahmedabad.

HowarD, D. 1987. Aspects of maternal morbidity:
the experience of less developed countries,
p. 1-35. In D. B. Jelliffe and D. F. Jelliffe (eds.),
Advances in International Maternal and Child
Health, Vol. 7, Oxford University Press, Oxford.

JEJEEBHOY, S. J. 1994. Maternal morbidity and mortality in South Asia: Priorities for social science
research. Paper presented at the Workshop on
Reproductive Health in South Asia, New Delhi,
26 September.

KoENIG, M. A., V. FAUVEAU, A. I. CHowbHUuRY, J.
CHAKRABORTY, and M. A. KHAN. 1988. Maternal mortality in Matlab, Bangladesh, 1976-85.
Stud. Fam. Plan. 19:69-80.

LISKIN, L. 1992. Prevalence of maternal morbidity
in developing countries. Center for Communications Programs, The Johns Hopkins University.

MacArtuur, C., M. Lewis, and E. G. Knox. 1991.
Health after childbirth. HMSO, London.

McCuLLaGH, P. 1980. Regression models for ordinal data (with discussion). Roy. Statist. Soc.
(Series B) 42:109-142.

McCartny, J., and D. MAINE. 1992. A frame work
for analyzing the determinants of maternal mortality. Stud. Fam. Plan. 23(1):23-33.

Matual, S. T. 1989. Women and the health system.
In C. Gopalan and S. Kaur (eds.), Women and
nutrition in India. Nutrition Foundation of India,
New Delhi.

OBERMEYER, C. M. 1993. Culture, maternal health
care, and women’s status: A comparison of Morocco and Tunisia. Stud, Fam. Plan. 24(6):354—
365.

Paotisso, M., and J. Lesuie. 1995. Meeting the
changing health needs of women in developing
countries. Soc. Sci. Med. 40(1):55-65.

STEWART, M. K., C. K. STANTON, M. FESTIN, and N.
JACOBSON. 1996. Issues in measuring maternal
morbidity: Lessons from the Philippines Safe
Motherhood Project. Stud. Fam. Plan. 27(1):29-35.

Wacker, G. J. A., D. ASHELY, A. McCaw, and G.
BERNARD. 1986. Maternal mortality in Jamaica.
Lancet 1(8479):486-488.

WINIKOFF, B. 1988. Women’s health: An alternative
perspective for choosing interventions. Stud.
Fam. Plan. 19(4):197-214.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 45, No. 3-4 Puerperal Morbidity 245

WorRLD BANK. 1995. Sri Lanka poverty assessment. Younis, N., H. KHATTAB, H. ZURAYK, M. EL
Report No. 13431—CE, World Bank, Washington. MOovuEL.ny, M. F. Amin, and A. M. Farac. 1993.

WorRLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 1990. Measuring A community study of gynecological and rereproductive morbidity: Report of a technical lated morbidities in rural Egypt. Stud. Fam.
working group. Geneva. Plan. 24(3):175-186.

 

 
