Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

Specific neurocognitional impairments associated
with turner (45,X) and Klinefelter (47,XXY)
syndromes: A review

John Money

To cite this article: John Money (1993) Specific neurocognitional impairments associated with
turner (45,X) and Klinefelter (47,XXY) syndromes: A review, Social Biology, 40:1-2, 147-151, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1993.9988841

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1993.9988841

 

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

A)
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 9

»
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 1 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:45

 
 

Brief Reports

Specific Neurocognitional Impairments
Associated with Turner (45,X) and

Klinefelter (47,XXY)
Syndromes: A Review

John Money

CY
=

“Psychohormonal Research Unit
the Johns Hopkins University and Hospital
GBaltimore, Maryland 21205

3
A

 

ABSTRACT: In Turner syndrome, there is a high incidence of neurocognitional impairment
\aspecific to the mental processing and sequencing of rotational transformations of shapes in the
= spatial dimensions of left-right, up-down, and back-front. In Klinefelter syndrome, the corresponding neurocognitional impairment is specific to the mental processing of sequence and
“synchrony in the temporal dimension, including the temporal dimension of language.

Some pediatric endocrine  syn‘sdromes are characterized by multiple
anomalies, one of which may be a neu4rocognitional impairment that affects
-AQ and learning. In such syndromes,
~all the anomalies stem ultimately from
the same source which may be, for
example, a traumatic or endogenous
‘brain lesion, a hormone-secreting tu‘amor, an infection, or a genetic anomaly. In the pediatric endocrine clinic,
Ctwo genetic anomalies affecting the actual sex chromosomal number are particularly frequent: the 45,X (Turner)
syndrome and the 47,XXY (Klinefelter) syndrome. In Turner syndrome,
there is a high incidence of neurocognitional impairment specific to rotational transformation in the spatial dimension. In Klinefelter syndrome, the
corresponding impairment is specific to
sequence and synchrony in the temporal dimension.

of Michigan

45,X (TURNER) SYNDROME

In this syndrome, in all of its chromosomai variations (affecting an estimated 1:5000 newborn girls), the neurocognitional impairment that may
affect intelligence and learning is in
evidence throughout childhood. Thus,
there is no doubt that its existence is
coexistent with, but not dependent on
inert gonadal streaks that fail to secrete
gonadal hormones at puberty.

The error of embryogenesis responsible for the differentiation of gonadal
streaks instead of ovaries is responsible also for other deformities that occur not universally, but sporadically
in Turner embryos. One of these additional sporadically occurring errors
will ultimately impair intelligence and
Jearning. One infers, therefore, that it
must be an error of brain differentiation. If there are regional or hemi
147
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

148 Brief Reports

spheric localizations, they have not yet
been demonstrated.

For a quarter century after Turner
first described the syndrome, impairment of intellect and learning, if
present, was mislabeled as mental retardation. The correct label, specific
cognitional deficit, was discovered in
the course of psychohormonal testing
(Shaffer, 1962) in the Psychohormonal
Unit of the Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Clinic at The Johns Hopkins Hospital and has since been confirmed in
many studies. It is widely agreed that,
whereas the deficit does not affect verbal intelligence, it may severely affect
nonverbal intelligence. The disparity
between verbal and nonverbal (performance) IQ’s may be as great as 30
points, with the verbal IQ being above
130.

By pooling and comparing the data
drawn from various studies based either on standardized psychological
tests (e.g., Money, 1964; Bekker and
Van Gemund, 1968; Garron, 1977;
Nielsen et al., 1977) or on special tests
(e.g., Alexander and Money, 1966; Silbert et al., 1977; Waber, 1979; Rovet
and Netley, 1982; McCauley et al.,
1987), it may be construed that the basic deficiency pertains to the mental
processing and sequencing of rotational transformations of shapes in the
spatial dimensions of left-right, updown, and back-front. The latter is
also the push-pull rotation which rotates the self-image, as in a mirror. In
the activities of everyday life, the rotational transformation deficit translates into a handicap in map reading,
following travel directions, drawing a
floor plan of a familiar room, deciphering sounds stereophonically, and recognizing changes in facial expression.

Social Biology

In psychological testing, rotational
transformation wreaks havoc on the
drawing of a person. This test necessitates rotational transformation of the
self-image onto a flat page on which the
left and right of the figure depicted before one’s very eyes is a mirror rotation
of one’s own left and right.

The mirror rotational effect interferes also with copying either a human
figure or a geometric shape (Alexander
et al., 1966). The rotation of angles and
points has the effect of turning the
shape that they define inside out (for
example, the points of a triangle become pouches) and creates more evidence of distortion than does the rotation of curves.

The link between rotational disability and shapes apparently extends from
geometry to calculation in general.
Mathematics is a great academic stumbling block for Turner girls. It frequently necessitates intervention from
the physician, in order to obtain from
the school a special dispensation so
that a verbally superior Turner student
will not be penalized for a genetically
derived specific nonverbal disability.

Vocationally, as well as academically, rotational transformation disability is a handicap in all assignments
that involve arrangements and rotations of designs and configurations.
With accumulated experience, a Turner girl’s degree of handicap may be
lessened by the device of transliterating from shapes and directions into silently spoken language.

Rotational transformation disability
is not a handicap to learning to read. It
may even be an advantage, insofar as
the shapes of letters and words retain
their meanings by remaining stable
and not rotated. Those with rotational
 

Vol. 40, No. 1-2

disability do not transform “b”’ into
“d,” or “p”’ into “q,”’ etc. The psychological law of object constancy dictates
that the meaning of a shape or object
perceived remains constant, even if it is
turned around or upside down, or
added to, or subtracted from, or broken (Alexander and Money, 1967;
Money, 1967). The ordinary child, in
learning to read, has to resist the law of
object constancy. Turner girls are
espared this resistance.

47,XXY (KLINEFELTER)
SYNDROME

In this syndrome intelligence may or
“may not be impaired. Impairment, if
“present, is evident prepubertally, prior
‘to the manifestation of hypergonadoaropic hypogonadism that characterHzes the syndrome from puberty on
ard.
4 Epidemiologically, the incidence
pt intellectual impairment among
a7 »XXY males is a function of the
ype of population cytogenetically
Screened. When large-scale screening
began i in the 1960's, the focus was on
snales segregated in penal, psychiatric,
“and mental retardation institutions. In
‘Zach type of institution, the proportion

{ 47,XXY males was in excess of the
Festimated 1:900 ratio that would be
found among newborn boys. So also
was the proportion of 47,XXY males
with a below-average or defective IQ.
It required cytogenetic screening of
males in infertility clinics, and subsequently in newborn nurseries, to show
that the majority of 47,XXY males
are of average and sometimes superior
IQ. Even though average, however,
the JQ may have been several points
higher without the supernumerary X

445 08 December

Money

149

chromosome—and this does appear to
be the case when 47,XXY males as a
group are compared with, say, their 46,
XY siblings, or a matched 46,XY control group (Theilgaard et al., 1971).

It became evident, from early in the
1970’s onwards, that the missing IQ
points are more often missing from the
Verbal JQ than the nonverbal or Performance IQ. Specific linguistic disability is more pronounced in some
47,XXY males than others. In some
47,XXY boys, the disability is manifested early in infancy as a developmental delay in the use of speech. It
may be severe enough to require
speech therapy. Later in childhood it
may be manifested pedagogically as a
learning disability specific for reading
(dyslexia) and spelling.

Oral and written language development was followed prospectively (Graham et al., 1988) in fourteen boys who
had been identified as 47,XXY in a
New England neonatal screening program. They were compared with fifteen 46,XY control boys when they
were between the ages of nine and ten,
at which age they were academically at
the transition between third and fourth
grade. On the basis of a broad spectrum of tests, it was concluded that linguistic disability in 47,XXY boys is
characterized by deficits in processing
the rate and order of auditory stimuli,
and in word finding, narrative sequencing, and arranging meanings syntactically.

The hypothesis that linguistic disability might be lateralized in one
hemisphere of the brain was experimentally investigated (Netley, 1988) in
a cohort of 23 prepubertal boys (average age, 10-11 years) who had been
identified as 47,XXY in a Canadian
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

150 Brief Reports

neonatal screening program. The
scores, compared with those of a normative sample of 79 children, indicated
that the ratio of left-right lateralization
deviated from the norm, and could be
interpreted to indicate an inadequate
degree of linguistic lateralization in the
left versus the right hemisphere of the
brain.

The foregoing data are compatible
with those from an earlier sentenceverification experiment (Netley and
Rovet, 1982) in which 47,XXY boys
(and also 47,XXX girls) matched sentences and pictures for agreement on
meaning (e.g., the boy is kicking the
girl; the girl is kicking the boy; the boy
is not kicking the girl; the girl is not
kicking the boy). The boys and girls
with the extra X chromosome did not
do as well as the chromosomally normal controls.

From all the foregoing findings considered together, it may be construed
that the basic deficiency pertains to the
mental processing of sequence and synchrony in time. Language ts a temporal
sequence: It takes time to speak a sentence, or to read it, just as it takes time
to tell or read a story. By contrast, it
does not take time to perceive a landscape, a picture, or a vehicle—only to

Social Biology

inspect it, or to watch its rotational
transformation in space.

Whereas 47,XXY males in general
do not have difficulty with rotational
transformation, they do so with temporal sequencing. It is possible that
one extension may be to the sequencing and synchrony of logical meaning
as manifested in the sporadic occurrence of pseudologia fantastica in
47,XXY boys and adolescents. The
same may apply to paranoid ideation
which is more prevalent than bipolar
disorder in those 47,XXY men who develop a severe psychopathological disorder.

The relationship of anomalies of sequencing and synchrony to anomalies
of hemispheric lateralization in the
brain is conjectural only, and will undoubtedly remain so until technological advances allow data to be obtained
directly from the brain itself. In the
meantime, ascertainment of such
anomalies, in those 47,XXY boys and
men who have them, is by means of behavioral and psychological tests. It is
clinically important that they be ascertained. The design of pedagogical and
vocational planning can then be more
effective.

REFERENCES

ALEXANDER, D., A.A. Enruarpt, and J.
Money. 1966. Defective figure drawing, geometric and human, in Turner’s syndrome. J.
Nerv. Ment. Dis. 142:161-167.

ALEXANDER, D., and J. Money. 1966. Turner’s
syndrome and Gerstmann’s syndrome. Neuropsychologia 4:265~273.

ALEXANDER, D., and J. Money. 1967. Reading
disability and the problem of direction sense.
The Reading Teacher 20:404-409.

Bekker, F.J., and J.J. Van Gemunp. 1968.
Mental retardation and cognitive deficits in
XO Turner’s syndrome. Maandschr. Kindergeneeskd 36:148~156.

Garron, D.C. 1977. Intelligence among persons with Turner’s syndrome. Behav. Genet.
7:105-127.

GraHaM, J. M., A. S. Basnir, R. E. Stark, A.
SILBERT, and S. WaLzer. 1988. Oral and written language abilities of XXY boys: Implications for anticipatory guidance. Pediatrics
81:795-806.

McCau ey, E., T. Kay, J. fro, and R. TreDEr.
1987. The Turner syndrome: Cognitive deficits, affective discrimination, and behavior
problems. Chid. Develop. 58:464—473.

Money, J. 1964. Two cytogenetic syndromes:
Psychologic comparisons. 1. Intelligence and
O15

 

Vol. 40, No. 1-2

specific-factor quotients. J. Psychiat. Res.

2:223-231.

. 1967. Learning disability and the principles of reading. The Slow Learning Child:
The Australian Journal on the Education of
Backward Children 14:69~87.

Netiey, C, 1988. Relationships between hemispheric lateralization, sex hormones, quality
of parenting and adjustment in 47,XXY
males prior to puberty. J. Chid. Psychol. Psychiat. 29:281-287.

NeTLey, C., and J. Rover. 1982. Verbal deficits
in children with 47,XXY and 47,XXX karyotypes: A descriptive and experimental
study. Brain and Lang. 17:58-72.

NIELSEN, J., H. Nysorc, and G. Dant. 1977.

Turner’s syndrome. A_psychiatric-psycho
logical study of 45 women with Turner’s syn
drome, compared with their sisters and
women with normal karyotypes, growth retardation and primary amenorrhoea. Acta

 

N
mi
oO

=
oO
oO
oO

Q

Co

©

CY

v.

oN

=

—
CS

‘g
S
oD

—

on
O

=

Ce
©
>>

—

—
N
~
oO
>

—™
c

.
va

Oo

cv
oO

va
3
©

—
c
S
©

a

 

Money 151

Jutlandica XLV, Medicine Series 21, Aarhus.

Rovet, J., and C. NETLEY. 1982. Processing deficits in Turner’s syndrome. Develop. Psychol. 18:77-94.

SHAFFER, J. W. 1962. A specific cognitive defect
observed in gonada} aplasia (Turner’s syndrome). J. Clin. Psychol. 18:403-406.

SicBert, A., P.H. Wo rr, and J. LILienTHAL.
1977. Space and temporal processing in patients with Turner’s syndrome. Behav.
Genet. 7:11~21.

THEILGAARD, A., J. NIELSEN, A. SGRENSEN, A.
Fr@_anp, and S.G. JoHNsen. 1971. A
psychological-psychiatric study of patients
with Klinefelter’s syndrome, 47,XXY. Acta
Jutlandica XLIITI:1, Copenhagen, Munks
aard.

Waser, D. P. 1979. Neuropsychological aspects
of Turner’s syndrome, Develop. Med. Chid.
Neurol, 21:58~70.
