Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Book notes

Kenneth A. Bennett

To cite this article: Kenneth A. Bennett (1975) Book notes, Social Biology, 22:2, 194-198, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1975.9988165

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1975.9988165

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Book Notes

ANIMAL BEHAVIOR: AN EvoLUTIONARY
ApproAcH: By John Alcock. Sinauer
Associates, Inc., Sunderland, Mass.,
1975. 547 pp. $14.00 (hardbound).

This basic textbook incorporates in an
evolutionary framework various findings
in behavioral genetics, neurobiology, and
behavioral ecology. Alcock stresses the
theory of natural selection and demonstrates its importance for an understanding of the disparate scientific disciplines
that contribute to the study of animal
behavior. The first two chapters provide
an introduction to the basic questions
about animal behavior and fundamentals
of evolutionary theory. Other chapters
deal with answers to the questions about
behavior, and human behavior is examined
in an evolutionary perspective in the final
two chapters.

STRATEGIC INTERVENTION IN SCHIZOPHRENIA: CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN
TREATMENT: Edited by Robert Cancro,
Norma Fox, and Lester Shapiro. Behavioral Publications, New York, 1974.
326 pp. $14.95 (hardbound).

Written primarily for the clinician, this
book scrutinizes in a critical fashion present knowledge of schizophrenia and examines new treatment strategies. The variant
manifestations of this truly heterogeneous
disorder are honestly and simply presented.
While designed for the clinician, it is a
valuable book for the relative of the

 

schizophrenic, the case worker, and all
who have a professional or personal interest in mental health. It is exceedingly
valuable because it puts forth in a fully
understandable way the problems of the
schizophrenic as he must exist in society.

Race: By John R. Baker. Oxford University Press, New York, 1974. 625 pp.
$15.00 (hardbound).

In a remarkably thorough fashion, Baker
discusses human races in the contexts of
history, biology, paleontology, and psychology. The book is divided into four
parts: Part I relates the history of scientific and philosophical thought about human races; Part II reviews the biological
background for race formation; Part III
offers selected studies of a few human
populations; and Part IV is devoted to the
volatile issue of race and intelligence.
Anthropologists and sociologists will find
this book to be perhaps the best-documented work on human races -ever published.

INTERNATIONAL JNVENTORY OF INFORMATION ON INDUCED ABORTION: By
Emily Campbell Moore-Cavar. International Institute for the Study of
Human Reproduction, Columbia University, New York, 1974. 654 pp. $5.00
(paper).

Research data and information from
approximately 130 countries are summa
194

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. 2

rized, all in the context of induced abortion. These data, gathered from 1960 to
1974, are presented and discussed from a
number of different standpoints: religious,
ethical, and moral issues; legal and administrative provisions; medical and psychological aspects; relative merits of abortion
and contraception; and certain demographic aspects. This sourcebook, in which
most of the information appears in tabular
form, should prove particularly useful to
sociologists, family planning administrators, and others involved with the abortion
issue.

STUDIES IN THE PHILOSOPHY oF BIOLOGY:
Edited by F. J. Ayala and T. Dobzhansky. University of California Press,
Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1974, 390
pp. $22.50 (hardbound).

This book represents the proceedings of
a conference “Problems of Reduction in
Biology,” held at Bellagio, Italy, in 1972.
A distinguished panel of 18 biologists and
philosophers of science have considered
questions relating to the strategy of biological research at different levels of organization. The book is particularly valuable
because the authors discuss in a lucid
manner the fundamental questions of biological explanation at the physico-chemical
level versus the organismic level.

GENETIC STRUCTURE OF POPULATIONS:
Edited by Newton E. Morton. Population Genetics Monographs, Vol. ITI. The
University Press of Hawaii, Honolulu,
1973. 313 pp. $17.50 (hardbound).

Sponsored by the University of Hawaii
and dedicated to Sewall Wright, the 34
original contributions in this volume represent the proceedings of the Hawaii Con
Book Notes

195

ference on Population Structure. The participants discuss aspects of nonrandom
mating structure, genetic distance measures, and molecular evolution. Most of
the articles in this volume are appropriate
for biological anthropologists and human
geneticists well-versed in statistical and
mathematical models and methods for the
analysis of genetic structure.

PROCEEDINGS OF A RESEARCH CONFERENCE ON NATURAL FAMILY PLANNING:
Edited by William A. Uricchio and
Mary Kay Williams. The Human Life
Foundation, Washington, D.C., 1973.
316 pp. $15.00 (hardbound), $5.00
(paper).

In this book are nineteen papers and
discussion by fifty-nine international conferees on various natural fertility control
methods, including the Basal Body Temperature Method and the Ovulation
Method. These papers advance data on
the properties of biological rhythms, on
gamete survival and the effects of aging
sperm and ova, and on the critical question of prediction, detection, and control
of ovulation. Psychological and sociological implications of family planning in
general are analyzed, in addition to the
methodology for effectiveness-evaluation
studies.

Human REPRODUCTION. BIOLOGY AND
SoctaL CHANGE: By Harold D. Swanson. Oxford University Press, New York,
1974. 392 pp. $10.00 (hardbound),
$4.95 (paper).

In this introductory textbook, Swanson
sets forth the biological aspects of human
reproduction and follows the human life
cycle chronologically from gamete formaDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

196 Book Notes

tion to maturity. Biological facts and
theories are applied to personal and social
problems related to reproduction, and
problems associated with new reproductive
technologies are given special emphasis.
Written clearly and without jargon, the
book will have special appeal to those without a broad biological background.

THE ANALYST AND THE ADOLESCENT AT
Work: Edited by Marjorie Yarley.
Quadrangle, The New York Times Book
Co., New York, 1974. 300 pp. $12.50
(hardbound).

The nine original contributions in this
book, written by psychiatrists and child
therapists, are first-hand clinica] accounts
of psychoanalyses of adolescents. These
presentations are detailed descriptions of
individual sessions covering a wide range
of psychopathology, including suicidal
tendencies, acting out, delusions, masturbation problems, homosexuality, bisexual
conflicts, and the role of transference and
defense analysis in the treatment of adolescents.

ON DEVELOPMENT. THE BroLocy oF
Form: By John Tyler Bonner. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, 1974. 282
pp. $10.00 (hardbound).

This work is a fluent synthesis of decades
of intensive progress in specialized areas
within the field of developmental biology.
Discoveries such as the deciphering of the
genetic code and animal behavior patterns
are placed in an evolutionary context, and
the continuities and transitoriness of individuals and individual forms are explored.
This book was written for biologists in all

Social Biology

fields and at all Jevels of training and
exemplifies Professor Bonner’s clear and
concise thinking.

REMARRIAGES, UNITED STATES: By Kristen
M. Williams and Russell P. Kuhn. Vital
and Health Statistics, Series 21, No. 25,
DHEW Publication No. (HRA) 741903. U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Rockville, Maryland, 1973. 27 pp. $0.65 (paper).

This short monograph analyzes national
trends in remarriage in 1969. Included are
data on previous marital status, color,
variation by state, remarriage rates by age
and sex, selection by previous marital status, and other characteristics of remarrying individuals. |

CoNcEPTS IN ETHOLOGY. ANIMAL AND
HumMAN BEwHAvior. VoL. 2: By M. W.
Fox. University of Minnesota Press,
Minneapolis, 1974. 139 pp. $8.50 (hardbound).

Based upon the Wesley W. Spink Lectures on Comparative Medicine, M. W.
Fox, a veterinarian, scientist, and psychologist, provides an introduction to ethology.
The origins of the field are described,
animal studies illustrated, and application
of ethology made to animal science and
improvement of the environment for both
man and animals. The behavior of wolves
and dogs is stressed and its relevance for
the understanding of human behavior simply and straightforwardly illustrated. This
is an excellent introduction to ethology for
the student in both the social and biological sciences.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. 2

PoPULATION AND THE NEW ByroLocy:
Edited by Bernard Benjamin, Peter R.
Cox, and John Peel. Academic Press,
London, 1974. 187 pp. $10.00 (hardbound).

These thirteen original articles by sociologists and biologists represent the Proceedings of the Tenth Annual Symposium
of the Eugenics Society, held in London
in 1973. These papers discuss the biological, social, and legal implications of new
advances in genetic engineering and related biological developments on fertility
control and life prolongation. Moral and
ethical considerations are also discussed.
The volume is designed for those involved
with human biology, genetics, sociology,
demography, economics, geriatrics, and
family planning.

36 LEcTURES IN Brorocy: By S. E. Luria.
The MIT Press, Cambridge, 1975. 439
pp. $8.95 (paper).

Professor Luria has published in a
highly organized and readable form the
lectures for his course in General Biology
at MIT. Although the main divisions include (a) Cell Biology and Cell Chemistry, (6) Biochemistry, (c) Genetics, (d)
Developmental Biology, and (e) Physiology, the main theme throughout is the
genetics and evolution of the organism.
Included as appendix material is more
technical background information, as well
as suggested discussion topics and sample
problems arranged by lecture numbers.
Luria suggests that “this course may offer
a useful paradigm for biology courses of a
kind suitable to good students who like to
look under the surface of the subject
matter.”

 

Book Notes 197

Folk REMEDIES OF THE Low CounNTRY:
By Julia F. Morton. E, A. Seemann
Publishing Co., Miami, 1974. 176 pp.
$12.95 (hardbound).

This botanical book describes technically
62 plants used in folk remedies. There is
detailed information on habitat, range,
medical uses, toxicity, and all important
details of plants used in South Carolina
in folk medicine. Colored photographs and
plant descriptions provide a guide to the
actual identification of each plant.

GENETICS AND AMERICAN SociETY: By
Kenneth M. Ludmerer. The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 1972.
222 pp. $10.00 (hardbound).

In outlining the development of eugenics
from the turn of the century, Ludmerer
discusses the prevailing scientific and social circumstances leading to the use of
the science of genetics for political and
social legislation. It is argued from an historical base that genetic theories were
used by eugenicists to influence the passage of various laws detrimental to society.
Ludmerer also traces the inhibitive effect
of eugenics on research into human genetics, suggesting that the latter was stimulated as a result of deep concern over the
hazards of atomic radiation.

THE DECLINE OF FERTILITY IN GERMANY,
1871-1939: By John E. Knodel. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N. J.,
1974. 306 pp. $14.50 (hardbound).

This work is the second in a monograph
series on the historic decline of European
fertility issued by the Office of Population
Research at Princeton University. Knodel
measures the main demographic trends in
Germany and tests many hypotheses on

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

198 Book Notes

fertility declines in the Western world
during the nineteenth century. Geographical patterns of fertility decline are examined; differential trends in fertility among
sectors of German society are delineated;
and sociological differentials in the timing
and extent of decline are identified by clas
sifying fertility indices by residence, occu- ©

pation, social class, and religion. This book
will be of special interest to sociologists,
social historians, and demographers.

GENETIC Frx: By Amitai Etzioni. Macmillan Publishing Co., New York, 1973.
276 pp. $7.95 (hardbound).

This work is an appraisal of the central
discussions that took place during a Paris
conference, “Recent Progress in Biology
and Medicine: Its Social and Ethical
Implications,” held by the Council for
International Organizations of Medical
Sciences. In a lucid examination of questions revolving around the revolutionary
advances in human genetic engineering,
Prof. Etzioni offers valuable insights into
the social, moral, and legal implications of
these achievements.

FAMILY PLANNING IN CANADA. A SOURCE
Book: Edited by Benjamin Schlesinger.
University of Toronto Press, Toronto,
1974. 291 pp. $3.95 (paper).

Thirty-three articles are included in
this book, of which seventeen appear for

Social Biology

the first time. The topics include medical,
sociological, and religious viewpoints on
family planning; birth control methods
and services; the problems of supplying
contraceptive services to unmarried individuals; and the attitudes of Canadian
groups to the controversial problem of
abortion. By judiciously selecting papers
from a number of professionals from the
medical and social sciences who outline
their findings in a nontechnical] manner,
Dr. Schlesinger has made a_ substantial
effort to illuminate these issues.

Tue Pacrric IsLANDERS: By W. W. Howells. Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York,
1973. 299 pp. $12.50 (hardbound).

In the authoritative but informal style
characteristic of many of his books, W. W.
Howells examines a wide body of evidence
for this synthesis of the natural history
of man in the Pacific Islands. To help
understand the peopling of Australia,
Melanesia, and Polynesia, Howells analyzes biological, archeological, and linguistic data with up-to-date methods. The
book is not a technical monograph on
methods, however, but rather a finely balanced work that will have considerable
appeal to both the specialist and general
reader.

KENNETH A. BENNETT

 

 
