Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Further causes of assortative mating: The

norms for perceived husband superiority and
mutt-and-jeff avoidance. Comment on epstein
and Guttman's “mate selection in man: Evidence,
theory, and outcome”

William H. James

To cite this article: William H. James (1987) Further causes of assortative mating: The norms
for perceived husband superiority and mutt#and#jeff avoidance. Comment on epstein and
Guttman's “mate selection in man: Evidence, theory, and outcome”, Social Biology, 34:1-2,
114-115, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1987.9988665

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1987.9988665

a Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB ann | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
alil Article views: 4
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 1 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:42

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Communications

    

    
 
 

  

Ps
eS eae Renee
=. ag

ite
%
6,

Further Causes of Assortative Mating: The Norms for Re fa
Perceived Husband Superiority and Mutt-and-Jeff

Avoidance. Comment on Epstein and Guttman’s

“Mate Selection in Man: Evidence, Theory, and

Outcome”’

William H. James

MRC Mammalian Development Unit
Wolfson House

University College

London, England

In their review of mate selection
(“Mate Selection in Man: Evidence,
Theory, and Outcome,” Social Biology
31:243-278, 1984), Epstein and Guttman make no mention of two processes
which increase the degree of assortative
mating over a range of human characteristics, e.g., age, stature, IQ, education, and social class. There is a tendency for both men and women to seek
relationships in which the man is—or
seems—in some sense “dominant” and
the woman “submissive.” Let us confine
attention to stature, though the principle applies to the other variables mentioned above. In Western societies, a
“husband-taller” norm exists (Beigel,
1954; Gillis and Avis, 1980). Both men
and women tend to seek and find mates
who will enable them, as a couple, to observe the norm.

Consider the effects of this. If tall
men and short women are prepared to
marry any partner (tall or short), but
short men are prepared only to marry

short women, and tall women are prepared only to marry tall men, then assortative marriage will be the probable
result. Tall men, being in competition
with short men in the search for short
women, will be under pressure to marry
tall women; and short women, being under competition with tall women in the
search for tall men, will be under pressure to marry short men. Thus a correlation between mates’ stature will result.
This stems not from any preference of
individuals for mates of their own size,
but simply from a preference of both
partners for a height differential favoring the husband.

However, this norm ts probably not
the only consideration. Tall men and
short women face the restriction that the
height differential within couples should
not be greater than is decreed by “‘suitability,” that is members of couples feel
the necessity to avoid the appearance of
Mutt and Jeff with their great disparity
in height. This latter norm would also

114
 

Vol. 34, No. 1-2

act to increase (slightly) the correlation
between spouses. These two norms together would produce a bivariate distribution of husbands’ and wives’ heights
that is not bivariate normal. Instead it
would be rather similar to that described
by McManus and Mascie-Taylor (1984),
showing both nonlinearity and heteroscedasticity.
The mean “scores” of grooms at the
_, time of marriage exceed those of brides
& in stature, age, and years of education.
S One might speculate that bivariate dis: tributions (by bride and groom) of (a)
2 age and (b) years of education at marA riage are similar to that described by
2 McManus and Mascie-Taylor (1984) reGilating to stature, and at least partially
co because of the norms suggested. The
other two variables (IQ and social class)
‘gare not so readily assessed as age and
.Ostature, and their means are roughly the
‘2 same for brides and grooms. But for
2 prospective marriage partners, these
¢ variables too are presumably subject to
‘"G the same norms of perceived husband
© superiority and Mutt-and-Jeff avoid‘= ance. In this latter context, one has
> merely to reflect on the opprobrium at<= taching to May-December weddings,
-¥ and on the suitability of liaisons between

Downloa

BEIGEL, H. G, 1954. Body height in mate selection. J. Soc. Psychol. 39:257-268.

Epstein, E., and R. GuTTMAN. 1984. Mate selection in man: Evidence, theory and outcome. Soc. Biol. 31:243-278.

GiLus, J. S., and W. E. Avis. 1980. The male

Communications

115

doctors and nurses as opposed to doctors and tea-ladies.

Now, since (1) the vast majority of
people marry, (2) the 1Q’s of the brides
and grooms are roughly the same, and
(3) it is not easy to assess IQ, it follows
that in a substantial proportion of couples, the IQ of the bride exceeds that of
the groom (neither perhaps being aware
of this). In other words, the norm is frequently unwittingly violated. Nevertheless, to the extent that people can assess
10 at all, it still has the effect of increasing any husband-wife IQ correlation attributable to other causes. And the same
is true of Mutt-and-Jeff avoidance.

It may be conceded that an element
of circularity is involved in invoking
Mutt-and-Jeff avoidance as an “‘explanation”’ for a correlation between
spouses. (A phenomenon is not explained by noting that there is a norm for
it.) But the same objection does not so
forcibly apply to the norm for perceived
husband superiority, because it is not
immediately clear that such a norm does
lead to a correlation between spouses.

In short, these two norms may help to
explain assortative mating for characteristics in which human beings can—if
only roughly—rank one another.

REFERENCES

taller norm in mate selection. Person. Soc.
Psychol. Bull. 6:396—401.

McManus, I[.C., and C.G.N. MascteTaytor. 1984. Human assortative mating
for height: Non-linearity and heteroscedasticity. Hum. Biol. 56:617-623.

 
