Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Attitudes toward population growth: Demographic
predictors

Leo G. Reeder, April A. Allison , Linda Brookover Bourque , Deborah Hensler
& Kenneth Bailey

To cite this article: Leo G. Reeder, April A. Allison , Linda Brookover Bourque , Deborah
Hensler & Kenneth Bailey (1974) Attitudes toward population growth: Demographic predictors,
Social Biology, 21:4, 360-367, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1974.9988134

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1974.9988134

 

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 3

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Attitudes Toward Population Growth:

Demographic Predictors

 

Leo G. Reeder, April A. Allison, Linda Brookover Bourque,

*Deborah Hensler, and Kenneth Bailey

School of Public Health, University of California, Los Angeles, California; *RAND Corporation,
Santa Monica, California; and {Department of Sociology, University of California, Los Angeles,

California

A series of studies on population growth
in the United States, including public
opinion surveys, were undertaken by the
Commission on Population Growth and
the American Future (1972); some of
these reports dealt with public opinion
(Hetrick et al., 1972; Rindfuss, 1972;
and Wolman, 1972) and others with the
political implications of policy decisions
(Lowi, 1972). Although the problems of
population growth were national in scope,
they were particularly relevant to highgrowth states such as Arizona, Florida,
and California. In California, a number of
legislators, motivated by either environmental or population issues, introduced
legislation aimed at controlling growth.

Within this context, we began a study
in the fall of 1971 of attitudes toward
population growth and toward policies
which might be adopted to regulate popuJation growth and distribution in California. Slightly over a thousand respondents
were interviewed within Los Angeles
County and another thousand were interviewed throughout the state. The survey
focused on the degree to which population
growth and its related environmental con
cerns was perceived as a social problem
and the solutions which respondents felt
could acceptably be used to regulate population growth and distribution. Questions
used in the survey referred to policy issues
specific to California as well as to issues
of national relevance. The data reported
in this study generally confirm evidence
gathered in other surveys (see Wolman,
1972; Rindfuss, 1972; Hetrick et al.,
1972; Barnett, 1970, 1972a, 19726). In
addition, we suggest some new interpretations for this kind of data.

Our results report (1) the level of concern about population growth expressed
by respondents in the samples interviewed;
(2) the saliency of the issue of population
growth to the respondents; and (3) the
relationship between the described population attitudes and sociodemographic
characteristics utilizing the multivariate
techniques of Automatic Interaction Detection and Multiple Classification Analysis.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

ATTITUDES TOWARD POPULATION GROWTH
IN CALIFORNIA

We asked respondents whether they

360

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 21, No. 4

would say that population growth: “(a)
is not now a problem for this country,
(6) is already a serious problem in the
United States, or (c) is not a problem
here now but may become one in the near
future.” A plurality of respondents—both
state-wide and in Los Angeles—were unwilling to say that growth was already
a problem, but did respond that it may
soon become one (see Table 1).

Attitudes Toward Population Growth

361

We originally hypothesized that substantial differences would exist between residents of Los Angeles and Californians in
general because of the greater problems of
population density, urban sprawl, and environmental pollution and health hazards
in Los Angeles County. Contrary to expectations, the responses were strikingly similar. In almost every case, the responses
given by Los Angeles residents to any

TABLE 1

PERCEPTION OF POPULATION GROWTH AS A PROBLEM FOR THE UNITED STATES

Los ANGELES CALIFORNIA
RESPONSE Per Cent* No. Per Cent No.
Not now a problem .........ce cece eeeees 17.5 170 17.0 171
Problem in near future .............000005 46.3 449 43.5 438
Already a problem ............ cece ensues 35.8 347 39.5 398
Don’t know .......cccccecccccccccecctucce 0.3 3 nee eee
All reSPpOMS€S ..cccse cece cere cece eencecs 100 969 100 1,007

*Los Angeles data have been weighted to take into account the differential probability that any given adult in
a household will be the individual chosen as the respondent. For example, in a household with a single adult, that
adult has 100 per cent chance of becoming the respondent. In a two-adult household, each adult has a 50 per cent
chance of being chosen. We have therefore weighted each case by the formula W = Adults in household/2.

In other surveys (Barnett, 1970, 1972a,
19725; Hetrick, et al., 1972; Rindfuss,
1972; Wolman, 1972), slightly over half
of the respondents considered population
growth to be a serious problem in the
United States. In contrast, less than 40
per cent of either segment of our sample
felt that population growth was already a
problem. The explanation for this apparent
discrepancy lies in the way the survey
questions were worded. Previous interviews asked the respondent whether or not
there was a problem now and perhaps
asked how serious the problem was; but
none of these surveys allowed respondents
to project their concerns into the future—
to say that there was no problem yet, but
that it was coming. When we combine the
present- and future-oriented alternatives
in our survey, we find that 82 per cent of
our sample believes that a population
problem does currently or may soon exist.

given question fell within five percentage
points of the answer given by Californians
in general to the same questions. Because
of this similarity of response and since we
were able to question Los Angeles residents
in greater depth, we will henceforth present
only the Los Angeles distribution.

SALIENCY TO RESPONDENTS OF THE ISSUE
OF POPULATION GROWTH

In any survey where respondents are
asked whether a specific social problem
does or does not exist, there is always concern as to how meaningful the issue really
is to people. Persons who may not be seriously concerned on a day-to-day basis may
agree that there is a problem when the
issue is specifically called to their attention. The present study utilized a variety
of techniques to try to ascertain the saliency to respondents of the issue of population growth.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

362 Reeder et al.

Before mentioning the issue of population, we asked our respondents to indicate
what they considered the most serious
problems in the United States. Only 8.3
per cent spontaneously mentioned overpopulation as one of the most serious problems. In addition, we asked the respondent
to describe the ideal size for the average
American family. Our analysis showed
that 55 per cent felt that the average family should have a maximum of two children. When asked the reason for their
choice of family size, 23 per cent of our
respondents spontaneously justified their
choice by mentioning the threat of overpopulation.

Consequently, we have four indicators of
the salience of the population problem to
Los Angeles residents: (1) Eight per cent
of our respondents spontaneously mention
overpopulation as a major problem for the
United States. (2) Twenty-three per cent
spontaneously mention overpopulation as
a reason for limiting family size to two or
fewer children. (3) In response to a structured question, thirty-six per cent state
that population growth is already a problem for the United States. (4) In response
to a structured question, eighty-two per
cent state that population growth is now,
or soon may be, a serious problem.

It is not clear which one or which combination of the above measures best reflects the “true” level of concern about
population growth. For subsequent analysis of the survey data, we constructed
an index rather than rely upon a singleitem indicator to measure population concern.

POPULATION ATTITUDES AND SOCIODEMOGRAPHIC
CHARACTERISTICS

Up to this point we have been concerned

with the distribution of attitudes among

our respondents at large. However, sex,

ethnicity, religion, age, level of income,

Social Biology

and education are variables which often
affect the distribution of attitudes. Previous studies have found few clear-cut
relationships between a concern about
overpopulation and the typical battery of
sociodemographic variables.

Most research on population attitudes is
based upon a limited sample and/or typically relies upon the fourfold table for
analysis. Few studies have employed systematic multivariate analysis to examine
the interaction between demographic variables and population attitudes. Barnett’s
(1972a, 19726) analyses of population
concern in both a national and a localized
sample is an exception.

Using controlled cross-tabs and singleitem measures of population concern, Barnett concluded that ‘demographic factors
were, for the most part, useless in explaining and predicting differences in attitudes
toward U.S. and world population growth
rates and population limitations” (1972a,
p. 59). He found that the only important
predictor of attitudes toward U.S. population growth was religion, and then only
within the upper-middle class. Barnett hypothesized that concern with overpopulation is primarily determined by the extent
to which further population growth jeopardized highly esteemed cultural values.

Barnett’s hypothesis is speculative and
lacks supportive evidence. He does not indicate which cultural values might be most
threatened by population growth nor how
we should measure the “perceived severity”
of the threat to a respondent’s values.

In terms of methodology, Barnett was
confronted by the common problem of
rapidly decreasing cell size in cross-tabular
analysis. As a result, he was limited to
exploring the effects of a maximum of two
predictors simultaneously. Although crosstabular analysis permits the investigation
of possible interaction effects, it remains
unsatisfying as a multivariate approach to

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 21, No. 4

the problem of assessing the predictive
power of a large set of demographic variables. Thus, his conclusion that demographic factors are useless in determining
population attitudes remains open to question.

The limitations inherent in Barnett’s
methodology suggest consideration of alternative methodological approaches to assessing the importance of demographic
variables in predicting population attitudes. We employed a two-step analysis
which utilized the Automatic Interaction
Detection program (AID) (Sonquist,
1970) followed by Multiple Classification
Analysis (MCA) (Andrews et al., 1973).

AID is a recursive program that identifies sample subgroups by “splitting” predictor characteristics according to their
relative abilities to explain the variation
in the dependent variable. This program
tests for interaction effects among the predictor variables which could otherwise confound an additive model of causality. Additivity in the data can be expected to
yield symmetry in the AID-generated tree
where the shape of the profiles of each
predictor in the various branches would
be similar. On the other hand, an asymmetric configuration would be symptomatic
of interaction effects warranting further
inspection of the variable interacting and
the construction of an interaction term(s)
based on the terminating branch(es).

Multiple classification analysis (MCA)
is a technique of multivariate analysis
similar to multiple regression, but which
facilitates the use of predictor variables of
a nominal or ordinal nature, with each
subclass of the independent variable
treated as a separate predictor and assigned a coefficient (Andrews et al., 1967).
Dependent variables may be dichotomized
or interval. While assuming additivity,
MCA does not require scales to be interval,
relations to be linear, or distributions to

Attitudes Toward Population Growth

 

 

363

be bivariate normal. Needless to say, the
AID-MCA interphase accommodates a
more accurate specification of the predictive model.

Multiple classification analysis incorporates a dummy variable procedure whereby
membership in each subclass of each predictor variable assumes unity (and nonmembership assumes zero). A grand mean
is presented for each subgroup. This is followed by an adjusted or controlled deviation. A comparison of these two deviations
shows the effect of controlling for the other
predictor variable (e.g., ethnicity), which
shows the strength of that variable relative
to other predictor variables in the equation. Unlike traditional regression betas,
a multiple classification beta is always
positive, since it is dealing exclusively with
a set of nominal categories. The direction
or distribution of the effect must be ascertained by looking at the adjusted coefficients for each subgroup within the variable.

The dependent variable consisted of an
additive index composed of the following
item responses: (a) spontaneous mention
of overpopulation as a major problem in
the United States; (&) choice of the response “population growth is already a
serious problem in the United States” in
answering a forced-choice statement; (c)
spontaneous mention of overpopulation as
a reason why the average American family should have no more than two children;
(d) an indication of being “very interested” in problems having to do with population growth.

Subjects received a “one” for each response made in the direction indicated by
a through d above; an index ranging from
zero to four was thus produced. Predictor
variables entered were education, ethnicity, age, religion, income, sex, and a measure of political conservatism.
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

13+ years
of school
Y¥ = 0.419
6 = 0.493
N= 413

All
respondents
Y¥ = 0.307
a = 0.461
N= 1024

0-12 years
of school
Y= 0.231
a = 0.421
N= 611

Angto, Other
Y = 0.278
o = 0,448
N= 425

Protestant,
Jewish, None
VY = 0.317
a = 0.465

N = 300

Black, Spanish
Y¥ = 0.126
6 = 0.332
N= 186

Catholic, Other
¥ = 0.185
6 = 0.389
N= 119

Black, Spanish,
Other
Y = 0.236
ao 0.424
N= 83

 

Fic. 1—AID analysis of population concern.

Protestant, Jewish,
None, Other
-¥ = 0.439

a = 0.496
N= 180

Catholic
Y= 0.220
a == 0.414
N= 44

Protestant, None,
Other
VY = 0.734
a = 0.442
N= 67

 

Catholic, Jewish
Y¥ = 0.460

a — 0.498
N= 39.

 

 

‘[e 19 AIpeay FOE

ASO[OIg [BII0G

 
Downloaded"*by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 21, No. 4

RESULTS

The initial unconstrained AID run
yielded a symmetric tree structure among
those predictor variables that contributed
significantly to explaining the variance of
population concern. The predictor variables, in order of importance, were education, ethnicity, age, and religion. Income,
sex, and a measure of political conservatism were never strong enough to elicit a
group split (see Figure 1).

A unique difference between Anglos and
non-Anglos in both educational classes
should be noted. When non-Anglos are
analyzed according to educational status,
we find that none of the remaining variables makes any significant difference in
determining their population attitudes.
Thus, the important factors are their nonAnglo ethnicity and their educational
level. However, among Anglos, we find
enough variation in attitudes for age and

Attitudes Toward Population Growth

365

religion to enter as important determinants
of attitude (see Table 2). The young
(ages 18-29) show more concern than
their elders, and non-Catholics show more
concern than Catholics—relationships that
are probably not too surprising.?

Among less-educated respondents, a split
occurs on religion before it occurs on age;
among more-educated respondents, the
converse is true. However, in the righthand side of the tree, the order of two
adjoining splits may be somewhat arbitrary and unstable (Sonquist, 1970). Consequently, we can state that the branches
are essentially symmetrical, and no strong
interaction effects emerged in our data.

Having ascertained the absence of interaction effects among the independent vari
1The ethnic category “Anglo” includes all
Caucasian respondents who do not have Spanish
surnames, Orientals and respondents from other
ethnic groups were placed in a separate category,
“Other.”

TABLE 2

MULTIPLE CLASSIFICATION ANALYSIS OF POPULATION CONCERN

 

 

 

Unadjusted Adjusted No. of

Variable Deviations* Deviationst Betat Cases§

Ethnicity eaeseeosee se Os eeehevesesveseeaeaeees eoe eee 0.164 eee
Non-Anglo ....... scence cceceecsees —0.140 —0.116 see 289
Anglo ...... 600s UECER ESHEETS ROREO 0.060 0.049 aes 680
Education ..ccccccccccsccccccccaccecs eee wee 0.152 eee
Bad) YEAS wcmescsenwnnaccnennsawens —0.076 —0.057 Swe 578
13-++ years ...... rrerTereri. ie, Gwe aw 0.113 0.085 Tr 390
Age @eeeeteeoaeveevee eas *e@G@eseevoeeeswe@taovnevoaete een ess 0.142 eos
18-29 LL cee eee een ccccesevcces . 0.094. 0.095 eee 307
30-49 eee eevreneoeenreneenaenseesonns eoene —0.053 —0.044 eee 356
SO icc cc cece ec ccnceees aeesoe eoee —0.032 —0.042 eee 298
Religion ..sscswswsssses errr aba ee cme . TT 0.087 eee
Catholie s.ascssesypews TPT Err eT Tee —0.097 —0.053 Te 329
Won-Catholie ssscanuscacsas ea%axe sea 0.052 0.029 aK 634
Conservatism ....-cccsececcees wecceae . eee 0.075 ome
IMCOME .. ccc cece ete cccucccces seecees ‘ i 0.073 eee
Sex SES EE oe eEeeeeeoeas eT e rr oa oT 0.055 nee

 

* The unadjusted deviations indicate the gross or unadjusted effect of the predictor.
f The adjusted coefficients may be considered an estimate of the effect of the predictor alone, holding constant all

other predictors in the analysis,

t These coefficients have an interpretation analogous to that of ordinary regression coefficients (beta weights) expressed
in standard form. Beta is based on the adjusted mean and provides a measure of the ability of the predictor to explain
variation in the dependent variable, the index of concern over population growth, after adjusting for the effects of all
other predictors.

$ Total number of cases is 969.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

366

ables, we can introduce the variables into
a multiple classification analysis. If our
AID analysis is at all stable, we should
expect that education, ethnicity, religion,
and age will prove to be our most powerful
predictor variables, although not necessarily in that order.

The first column in Table 2 gives the
level of the dependent variable (index of
concern for population growth) for each
predictor variable. A positive coefficient
indicates that the predictor variable in
question has a rate of concern above the
overall average in the sample; a negative
coefficient indicates that the predictor has
a lower rate than the average. The second
column (adjusted) indicates the level on
the dependent variable (e.g., concern for
population growth) for each predictor when
the confounding effects of all other variables in the table are taken into account.

When the demographic variables were
introduced into this additive model, our
expectations were fulfilled. We find ethnicity to be our most powerful predictor,
followed closely by education and age. The
frequently heard charge that overpopulation is a concern of the college-educated
Anglo community and that it has little
perceived relevance to minorities thus appears to have some basis in fact. Unfortunately, our data do not clarify whether
minority opinion is a reflection of concern
over implicit genocidal threats in population control programs or whether these
groups simply do not consider overpopulation to be a social problem.

After noting the inverse effect of age as
the third relatively strong predictor, we
observe that the strength of the predictors
drops markedly. Religion is clearly not important as a predictor, As might be expected, Catholics are less concerned about
overpopulation than non-Catholics. Finally, there is a slight tendency for political liberals, persons with low income,

Reeder et al.

Social Biology

and women to show a greater concern
about overpopulation than do others.

DISCUSSION

Although clear and predictable patterns
have emerged in our data, we find that
much of the variance remains unexplained
even though we attempted to correct two
major weaknesses of previous studies. Alternatively, it is well to consider Sewell’s
(1973) caution that the scientific importance of a variable may reside more in its
interpretive role in a causal process than
on the amount of variance it explains.

By utilizing a cumulative scale rather
than a single-item dependent variable, we
have attempted to ensure that those respondents classified as “concerned” were
in fact consistently expressing an attitude
of concern, rather than randomly responding to a single nonsalient forced-choice
item. We then checked for interaction effects which might obscure the power of
individual predictor variables and found
none.

It thus appears that the variables that
would explain population attitudes lie outside the set of demographic predictors
commonly utilized in published cross-tabular presentations of population attitudes
(Rindfuss, 1972; Kantner, 1968). To this
limited extent we agree with Barnett
(1972a). However, specific suggestions
for further exploration of the distribution
of population attitudes are necessary.

First, we need a more sophisticated measure of the salience of population issues
to the respondent. The scale utilized above
is superior to a single-item attitudinal response, but it was not designed specifically to measure the salience of population
issues. In addition to items similar to
those used, we might want a set of items
measuring the extent to which the respondent feels overpopulation contributes
to other social and economic problems.

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No. 4

Second, we will want to explore the patterns evidenced by a specified set of predictor variables over other similar areas
of concern—perhaps ecological concern,
the energy crisis, and one or two less
closely related political items. This exploration will give an indication of the
extent to which the patterns we have observed are generalizable regardless of issue
content. It would then be possible to determine whether the explanatory power of
our independent variables, taken as a
whole or separately, was specific to the
population issue or whether it was a specific
variation of a configuration which predicted or explained attitudes toward a
broader range of political issues.

As additional independent or intervening variables, we need to explore the effect
of exposure to the mass media, of other
forms of political concern and involvement, and possibly the effect (looked at
separately for older and younger respon
Attitudes Toward Population Growth

367

dents) of completed fertility decisions.
Only when all of these steps have been
completed can we really begin to understand the distribution of population attitudes in the United States.

Finally, it is entirely conceivable that
“population” is a concept too far removed
from the life experiences of most people;
that is, it may simply be too abstract a
phenomenon and hence does not fall
within the spectrum of typical data examined usefully by the survey method of
research. Other, more sensitive techniques
of social research may need to be utilized
either prior to or in conjunction with the
survey method to elicit better understanding of the phenomenon.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported by a FordRockefeller grant from the Program of Social
Science and Legal Research on Population
Policy. We wish to express gratitude to
Dianne Inuzuka for assistance with data
processing and analysis.

REFERENCES

Anprews, F. M., J. Morcan, J. A. Sonquist, and
L. Krrm. 1973. Multiple classification analysis.
Institute for Social Research, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Barnett, L. 1972. Demographic factors in attitudes toward population growth and control.
J. Biosoc. Sci. 4:9-23.

. 1970a. U.S. population growth as an ab
stractly-perceived problem. Demography 7:53
60.

 

. 19706. Concern with environmental deterioration and attitudes toward population limitation. Bioscience 20:999-1002.

COMMISSION ON POPULATION GROWTH AND THE
AMERICAN Future. 1972. Population and the
American future. New American Library, Inc.,
New York.

Hetrick, C., C. NasH#, A. E. Kem, and A. J.
Wyner. 1972. Population and politics: Information, concern, and policy support among
the American public, p. 301-331. Jn Commission
on Population Growth and the American Future
research reports No. 4: Governance and populaBon, Government Printing Office, Washington,
D.C,

KANTNER, J. 1968. American attitudes on popula
 

ion policy: Recent trends. Stud. Fam. Plan.

71-7,

Low, T. 1972. Population policies and the American political system, p. 283-300. In Commission
on Population Growth and the American Future
research reports No. 4: Governance and populape Government Printing Office, Washington,

Rinpruss, R. 1972. Recent trends in population
attitudes, p. 465-468. Ix Commission on Population Growth and the American Future Research
Reports No. 6: Aspects of population growth
policies. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

SrwrrtL, W. 1973. Symposium on Jenck’s Inequality. Amer. J. Sociol. 78:1532-1540.

Songuist, J. A. 1970. Multivariate model building.

_Institute for Social Research, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Wotman, D. M. 1972. Findings of the commission’s national public opinion survey, p. 475495. In Commission on Population Growth and
the American Future research reports No. 6:
Aspects of population growth policies. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
