Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

Sociocultural factors and the genetic
diversification of Amazonian Indians: A brief
overview

Gilberto F. Souza Aguiar

To cite this article: Gilberto F. Souza Aguiar (1993) Sociocultural factors and the genetic
diversification of Amazonian Indians: A brief overview, Social Biology, 40:1-2, 38-47, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1993.9988834

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1993.9988834

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 6

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:45
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

Sociocultural Factors and
the Genetic Diversification
of Amazonian Indians:

A Brief Overview

Gilberto F. Souza Aguiar

Departamento de Ecologia
Museu Paraense Emilio Goeldi
Belém, Parad, Brazil

The manner in which a society defines its strategies of preservation, subsistence, and relations with other societies may result in peculiar patterns
of the expression of sociocultural
traits. Theoretically, the more diversified such strategies, the more complex
their effects on the social organization
of the group, at any level of analysis
(Vayda and Rappaport, 1976; Moran,
1982).

Sociocultural traditions constitute
one of the ways in which the lifestyle of
a people may be expressed. According
to Hughes (1988), their evolution does
not occur randomly or as a simple reflection of direct external influences,
but above all as a result of individual
and group necessities related to biological survival. The framework of modern human sociobiology shows that
the expression of social behavior and
cultural manifestations in our species
are influenced by basic strategies of adaptation to the contingencies of the
natural world and to the peculiarities
inherent in the lifestyle of the communities.

But the relationship biology versus
culture does not occur in an unidirectional way. If many human sociocultural practices result from adaptive necessities of a biological nature,

38

 

 

there are also those that affect the genetic features of populations, modifying them and acting as determining
agents of biological differentiation.
Some of these practices are capable of
causing dramatic changes in the genetic
profile within and between human
groups (Neel and Salzano, 1967; Chagnon et al., 1970; Neel et al., 1972). Although they are currently reduced by
some geneticists to the level of “‘stochastic phenomena” (namely, random
genetic drift), they can act in a directional manner, which is perceptible
only if it is possible to know the variables governing them.

Amazonian Indian groups and those
of neighboring areas in South America
present a great heterogeneity of linguistic (Loukotka, 1968), demographic
(Aguiar, 19902), and sociocultural (Galvao, 1960) patterns. Their recent histories are also diversified, although
changes derived from the impact of the
acculturation process are a common
trait among them (Schaden, 1969).
However, even when we take into account this impact, tribal groups seem
heterogeneous, for they did not suffer
the disruptive influences of the national society with the same intensity
and in identical historical periods
(Ribeiro, 1947; Whitehead, 1988).

 

 

 
 

Vol. 40, No. 1-2

Sociocultural and historical particularities of native populations of the
northern part of South America appear
to influence their genetic profile in
several ways. Recent studies show, for
instance, that the degree of intergroup
genetic diversity is not the same when
we consider tribes of distinct linguistic stocks, these differences being related to demographic and ethnohistor
— ical variables. Callegari-Jacques and
“ Salzano (1989) reveal that the average

ial
S genetic distance among eight Tupi

5 groups is about two or three. times
8 greater than the average genetic diso tance among nine Carib groups. The
w» authors note that sizes of present Tupi
= tribes are significantly smaller than
= those of the Carib tribes. They asso= Ciate the two facts, considering the
Sp greater Tupi genetic dispersion as a
‘= consequence of probable effects of
S random genetic drift. Salzano and
‘6 Callegari-Jacques (1988) referred to
=the fact that Tupi constitutes the only
5 linguistic stock already studied that
‘2 presents a within-stock genetic dis“tance greater than between-stock
= distances, a probable result of the mi3 gratory behavior of this group. These
3 Indians have covered large geographi‘e cal distances in relatively short periods,
: spreading from the Andes to the Atlantic Coast, from Rio de la Plata to
the Guianan highlands. Therefore,
they supposedly maintained contact
with several other peoples and were
exposed to a great variety of environments (Radin, 1942; Pericot and Garcia, 1962). This would favor the process of gene flow and selection that
may be responsible for the great genetic diversity within the stock (Salzano and Callegari-Jacques, 1988). But
such an argument does not explain

 

Amazonian Indians 39

why geographically neighboring Tupi
tribes can be genetically very dissimilar, such as the Parakana, the UrubuKa’apor, and the Assurini, for instance.

Another study (Aguiar, 1990a) supports the hypothesis that the present
demographic situation of Tupi and
Carib groups does not constitute specific population patterns of these
stocks, but rather reflects mainly recent ethnohistorical changes. Tupi
groups have suffered from a much
more accentuated process of depopulation than Carib groups in the last
two centuries. According to Ribeiro
(1957), the more pronounced demographic decline among the Tupi is a
result of a relatively smaller cultural
distance between these groups and representatives of the national society;
which by making communication easier thereby intensified contacts, concentrating the disruptive pressures
generated in each stage of integration.
The author emphasizes that other linguistic stocks suffered from a “ponderably smaller’? demographic decline.
Besides their intense depopulation
(61.4 per cent on average, in seven
tribes of the Amazon basin and Bolivia), which could have favored intergroup genetic diversification, through
a “bottleneck” effect, tribes of the
Tupi stock showed a rate of intergroup
contact significantly smaller than that
of Carib tribes in the last two generations. Demographic decline and the
relative isolation of the Tupi may have
contributed, therefore, to the highly
differentiated biological profiles presented by the Tupi stock today.

Evidence on the genetic intragroup
diversity of the Carib and Tupi tribes
suggests that genetic drift should not

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

40

be considered the major factor responsible for the biological structure of native Amazonian peoples. As demonstrated mathematically (Wright, 1951),
drift produces an increase in the variance of inter-generation gene frequencies in populations with small effective
size, causing the fixation or extinction
of alleles and a greater dispersion of
gene frequencies. The consequence is a
reduction in the degree of genetic variation.

A recent study (Aguiar, 19905)
shows that, despite their distinct demographic patterns, mean heterozygosities of Carib and Tupi tribes are not
statistically different. No association
between demographic size and _ heterozygosity was found for a total of 18
South American populations belonging to three linguistic stocks (Tupi,
Carib, and Gé). On the other hand, a
significant correlation was found between the degree of intragroup diversity and number of contacts (trade,
warfare, and intermarriage) maintained by each tribe with the remaining
tribes of all those studied since the end
of the eighteenth century. As the occurrence of contacts implies gene flow,
intragroup genetic variability of South
American tribes seems to be less influenced by recent demographic patterns
than by historical relationships between populations.

A tendency in the last fifteen years
among geneticists who study South
American Indian tribes is the search
for patterns of association between linguistic and genetic factors. Such studies have met with little success, however (Black et al., 1983; Black et al.,
1990; Aguiar, 1990a). Black and Claus
(1990) believe that one of the reasons
for the failure of this approach is that

Aguiar

 

Social Biology

the genetic markers usually employed
(monogenic systems) are not adequate
for a satisfactory understanding of
Amerindian genetic diversity. In their
opinion, complex markers such as
those of the HLA and Ig systems would
provide more reliable and accurate information on the genetic structure of
these peoples, allowing for the identification of more realistic relationships
between geography, linguistics, and
genetics.

However, the suggestion of Black
and Claus (1990) does not seem to be
valid in all situations. In some cases,
the complexity of observed genetic patterns in tribal groups is not due to factors linked effectively to linguistic classification and, irrespective of using
simple monogenic or haplotypic markers, results tend to furnish the same
picture of genetic differences. For example, the Assurini, Parakana, Wa1api, and Emerillon Tupi Indians, who
maintained recent relations with the
Gé (the two former, through warfare)
and with the Carib (the two latter,
through warfare, trade, and intermarriage) are genetically much more similar to tribes from these two linguistic
stocks than to the tribes of the Tupi
stock. In a recent study based on seven
polymorphic loci (Aguiar, 1990a), the
Assurini and the Parakana were shown
to have an average genetic distance
(Nei, 1987) of 0.121 with five other
Tupi groups and of 0.046 with eight
Gé groups (Mann-Whitney: U =7;
p <0.01). On the other hand, the Tupi
of Oiapoque (Waiapi and Emerillon),
settled in traditional Carib Indian territory, are far more similar to these Indians (about 2.6 times) than they are to
the remaining Tupi tribes (U = 36;
p <0.01). In conclusion, in the case of

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

Vol. 40, No. 1-2

the Tupi Indians, who constitute one of
the more disperse and culturally most
complex linguistic stocks of South
America, genetic affinities with other
groups are much more closely linked to
sociocultural and ethnohistorical factors than to simple linguistic relationships.

A socioculturally defined phenomenon that can modify the genetic structure of a population is differential fertility, generally resulting from the
practice of polygyny. Such a practice is
common among many native Amazonian groups, where polygynous men
are normally the tribal headmen or
other individuals of high social status
(Betzig, 1986). One of the most important genetic consequences of differential fertility is a decrease in effective
population size, by virtue of a significant increase in the variance of the
number of children from the adult
male segment (Salzano et al., 1967).
As a result, conditions for the occurrence of genetic drift are created.

Chagnon et al. (1970) described an
important microevolutionary process
involving gene flow and differential
fertility in Yanomami and Makiritare
villages from Northern Brazil and
Southern Venezuela. In the case study
carried out by the authors, only one
Yanomami Indian village exhibited the
alleles DI*A (Diego system) and
ACPi*A (acid phospohatase system)
with frequencies of 0.06 and 0.08, respectively, while in the remaining 40
villages the former allele was absent
and the latter was present at much
lower frequencies. The source of these
genes was attributed to a Makiritare
village. Frequencies of DI*A and
ACPi*A were very similar in the ‘‘atypical” Yanomami village and in the Ma
Amazonian Indians

41

kiritare village. The explanation for
this unusual fact would depend on “‘demographic, social, and cultural parameters influencing marriage and reproduction.” Phenomena peculiar to the
social organization of these tribes, such
as polygyny being limited to tribal
headmen and more numerous descendents to captive women, would thus
constitute a fundamental aspect of the
interpretation of these genetic findings. According to the authors, this effect is random in the genetic sense (genetic drift) but not in the sense of the
social organization of many tribal populations. They note also that the probability of a captive individual introducing a gene into a population with
sociocultural patterns similar to those
of the Yanomami is a function of the
sex that initially carries the gene.
Differential fertility can also arise
after the founder effect. In the context
of Amazonian tribes, this generally
occurs as a consequence of fissions
through intragroup tension or the necessity of population expansion (Chagnon, 1976; Gallois, 1981, 1986; Gallois
and Ricardo, 1983). When fission occurs, the new population can present a
high degree of differentiation in comparison with the original (Spielman et
al., 1972; Ward, 1972; Thompson and
Neel, 1978). Although the possibility
of the survival of a new mutation is
low, the discovery of several rare genetic variants at high or intermediate
frequencies in only one or a few tribes
indicates that the founder effect may
have been relevant in the shaping of
the gene pool of these populations
(Salzano and Callegari-Jacques, 1988).
A dramatic case of differential fertility in an expanding population was
observed among the Karitiana Indians

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

A2 Aguiar

of Rond6nia State, Brazil (Aguiar et
al., 1990). By studying the polymorphism of the CHE2 locus of serum
cholinesterase in this tribe, Guerreiro
et al. (1989) found the highest frequency of the phenotype C5+ (determined by a dominant allele) recorded
in human populations, about 50 per
cent. By analyzing the Karitiana pedigree, they suggested a probable explanation for the phenomenon. This
situation was traced to a deceased individual of one of the first generations
in the pedigree, who was married to
seven women and thus appears to have
disseminated his genes to almost all the
group. The serum typing of individuals
in each of the seven progenies revealed
the presence, in five of them, of the
variant phenotype C5+. Kidd and
Kidd (1990), studying 21 polymorphisms of nuclear DNA in this Amazonian tribe, observed a relatively low
mean heterozygosity, in agreement
with the high degree of kinship among
the members of the population, directly related to the extraordinary fertility of the ancient headman. The example of the Karitiana, such as that of
Chagnon et al. (1970), indicates that
the factors usually classified in population genetics as the result of random
processes, may be best studied at the
level of social structure and cultural
practices.

Neel and Salzano (1967) point to the
process of fission-fusion as another socioculturally determined event that
may have important consequences for
the genetic structure of Amazonian Indian populations. Its evolutionary significance has been studied by using
mathematical models, computer simulations, and through empirical experiments (Chagnon, 1976; Thompson,

 

Social Biology

1979; Smouse et al., 1981). As Chagnon (1976) suggests, fission of a group
into two or more segments is due to
ecological and political factors or to
questions of internal tribal organization in the majority of cases. It generally occurs according to kinship lines
and can lead to a process of highly nonrandom migration (lineal effect) and to
a significant reduction in the effective
size of the group. The smaller product
of the fission, summing about 40 to 60
individuals, may join other villages or
form a new population. If a new tribe
is founded by a group of related individuals, initial intergroup genetic differences can be substantially greater
than would be expected by equal division or even founder effect. Ward
(1972) argues that the most important
difference between the lineal effect
and the founder effect is the lack of a
random component in the former.
Non-representative samples of the
gene pool of a parental village can lead
to divergent gene frequencies in a recently founded population.

The fission-fusion model leads to a
break of isolation and to intergroup
gene flow, modifying the genetic composition of a population. Neel and
Salzano (1966), commenting on the
relatively high morphological diversity
of Xavante Indians obtained in a previous study (Neel et al., 1964), hypothesize that the genetic diversity of
hunter-gatherer populations should be
smaller than that of modern urban conglomerates, but the pattern of fissionfusion of these Indians would be a
factor increasing the degree of variability. In other cases, the pattern of fission may involve less migration between sister villages, as occurs among
the Yanomami, through a centrifugal

 
 

Vol. 40, No. 1-2

pattern of expansion. In comparison
with Wright’s island model (1943) and
the stepping-stone model of Kimura
(1953), the fission-fusion model seems
to explain a great part of the genetic
heterogeneity of primitive peoples.
The lineal effect is a kind of random
event in a genetic sense but is deterministic in social sense and is specially
applicable to populations of primates
‘2 (Neel, 1970; Cheverud et al., 1978;
& Cheverud and Buikstra, 1978). The baQsic feature of this effect is that the
Esocial structure of tribal populations
Susually implies that the breakdown
_ (fission) of groups will lead to a num~ ber of independent genomes smaller
than the number of individuals (Neel,
— 1967; Neel and Salzano, 1967; Fix,
1975). With respect specifically to the
lineal effect, an important case study
‘< based on a quantitative trait was deSs scribed by Fleischman (1980) for the
+3 Warao Indians. The author asserts that
p the significantly higher stature in indiZ viduals from one village of this tribe in
.2. comparison with that of the remaining
— five villages resulted mainly from this
pegenetic effect. High stature constitutes
gan unusual polygenic marker among
Sthe Warao. Its high frequency in the
differentiated village was associated
= with a large number of individuals geAnetically related to a local patriarch
who is morphologically atypical (exceptionally taller than the tribal average). The physical environment of the
Warao is such that very close villages
can be socially isolated, inhibiting gene
flow between neighboring settlements.
Warao villages and society are linearly
organized resulting in biologically and
socially related men marrying within
the same preferential enclave. Stature
distribution in the village studied by

Amazonian Indians 43

Fleischman (1980) was considered to
be a result of contributions through
kinship lineages, preserved by the
physical and social environment. This
is One more demonstration of how an
aspect of the recent history of a human
group may influence its present biological profile.

Sociocultural factors do not always
influence the differentiation of entire
populations, but also differentiation in
specific population segments. Physical
anthropologists have searched for associations between biological variability and postmarital residential practices in prehistorical groups, on the
basis of nonmetrical skeletal features,
attempting to reconstruct aspects of
the social organization of our ancestors
(Lane and Sublett, 1972; Spence, 1974;
Neves, 1984). They assume that the degree of biological homogeneity among
the males and females of a village/tribe
may reflect marriage and residence
rules. Where exogamy is associated
with a virilocal residential practice, it is
reasonable to assume that biological
continuity occurs through the male
line, while if exogamy is followed by
uxorilocality, continuity is through
the female line. Similarly, intergroup
within-sex heterogeneity would tend to
be more accentuated in the less mobile
sex.

Konigsberg’s formal model (1989)
suggests that this process may effectively occur in the male and female
segments of subpopulations of a larger population whose postmarital residence system is unilocal. According to
this model, in populations where the
residence pattern leads to a higher rate
of postmarital male mobility and the
permanence of females in their native
villages (in other words, uxorilocal

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

44 Aguiar

populations), greater intergroup genetic diversity would be observed
among females than among males. Virilocal populations would present the
opposite effect.

Aguiar and Neves (1991) performed
a case study on the relations between
residence system and within-sex genetic heterogeneity in four UrubuKa’apor villages, a uxorilocal Tupi
tribe of Northern Brazil, where traditional inter-individual, interfamilial and intergroup relationships are
largely maintained. The results obtained from an intergroup genetic analysis of 20 polymorphic loci agreed
remarkably with the theoretically expected pattern. Average genetic distance among village females (0.235)
was significantly greater than the average distance among males (0.143),
when the method based on a genic
covariance matrix (Harpending and
Ward, 1982) was used for the calculation of distance. By using Nei’s method
(1987), the difference became more accentuated, with the average genetic
dispersion for females about 2.5 times
greater than that of males.

The effect of the residence system of
Ka’apor villages on the genetic heterogeneity of males and females became
more evident when only groups belonging to the same network of mate
exchange were included in intergroup
analysis. Geographical and _ ethnographic data on the Ka’apor tribe show
that three of the four villages studied
by Aguiar and Neves (1990) are located in the same river basin, while the
fourth is located in a different basin.
The geographically isolated village is
also genetically isolated from the others. William Balée (personal communication) asserts that its exogamic net
 

Social Biology

work involves only villages located
within the same river basin or otherwise within close proximity. Because of
this particular fact of the Ka’apor social organization, genetic diversity in
female segments is much more accentuated when only the three villages belonging to the same exogamic network
are included in the intergroup analysis. In this case, the Fst value of the female fractions (0.061) was significantly
greater than the Fst of the male fractions (0.022). Besides this, Nei’s genetic distance is extraordinarily greater
(about 13 times) among females of the
three villages than among their males.
Detection of greater or smaller withinsex diversity resulting from unilocal
residence systems thus appears to depend on the identification of groups involved in the same exogamic circuit.
As Neel (1990) emphasizes, investigation of the genetic structure of primitive South American human populations may make a major contribution
to our understanding of the mechanisms that have governed the evolution
of our species. Chagnon et al (1970) assert that small evolutionary events related to sociocultural factors would be
important in establishing different allelic frequencies in an emergent tribe.
Neel (1990) considers it is highly probable that ancient man lived in social
aggregates similar to, or even smaller
than the present small villages of
hunter-gatherer or primitive farming
tribes, and that populations expanded
by successive fissioning of these aggregates. The fundamental role of sociocultural factors in this process demands
that they be considered not only as
merely “random” events of the “genetic drift’ kind, but as deterministic
agents capable of producing more or

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

Vol. 40, No. 1-2

less quantifiable degrees of intra- and
intergroup differentiation in the native
peoples of the continent. Although
such a treatment had already been followed in some cases (Thompson and
Neel, 1978; Thompson, 1979; Smouse
et al., 1981; Fix, 1982), it is still necessary to extend its applicability and to
test each method in a systematic manner in real situations. Only then the
process of differentiation of Amazonian and South American primitive

Amazonian Indians

 

45

man—and, by extension, of Homo sapiens sapiens —can be understood in all
its complexity.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This paper was presented at the symposium “Lifestyles” of the First Congress of
the Asociacién Latinoamericana de Antropologia Biolégica, Montevideo, October
29, 1990.

REFERENCES

Acuiar, G.F.S. 1990a. Ethnohistory, intertribal relationships, and genetic similarity
among Amazonian Indians. Paper presented
at the symposium Recent trends of bioanthropological research among Lowland
South American Indian populations, 59th annual meeting of the American Association of
Physical Anthropologists, Miami, Florida,
April 3-7.

. 1990b. Effects of demographic and ethnohistorical factors on average heterozygosities of South Amerindians. Paper presented
at the Ist Congress of the Asociacién Latinoamericana de Antropologia Bioldgica,
Montevideo, Uruguay, 29-31 oct.

Acuiar, G. F.S., J. F. Guerreiro, and S. E. B.
Santos. 1990. Fertilidade diferencial, endogamia e alta freqtiéncia do alelo CHE2*C5 +
entre os indios Karitiana, Rondénia. Paper
included in the annals of the 36th Congresso
Nacional de Genética, Brazil.

Acuiar, G. F. S., and W. A. Neves. 1991. Postmarital residence and within-sex genetic diversity among the Urubu-Ka’apor Indians,
Brazilian Amazon. Hum. Biol. 63(4):467488.

Betzic, L. L. 1986. Despotism and differential
reproduction; a Darwinian view of history.
Hawthorne, De Gruyter Aldine, New York.

Back, F. L. and E. B. Craus. 1990. Reasons
for failure of genetic classifications of South
Amerind populations. Paper presented at the
symposium Recent trends of bioanthropologica] research among Lowland South American Indian populations, 59th annual meeting
of the American Association of Physical Anthropologists, Miami, Florida, April 3-7.

Brack, F. L., J. P. PANpEy, and S. E. B. SAnTos. 1992. Evidéncias das afinidades inter- e
intra-continentais entre populagdes nativas

 

da Amaz6nia com base no ststema HLA e
imunoglobulinas. /n Origens, adaptagdes e
diversidade biolégicas do homem nativo da
Amazonia, W. Neves, ed., in press.

Brack, F.L., F.M. Sarzano, L. L. Berman,
Y. GaspsBay, T.H. Weimer, M. H.L. P.
Franco, and J. P. PANDEY. 1983. Failure of
linguistic relationship to predict genetic distances between the Waiapi and other tribes
of Lower Amazonia. Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 60:327-335.

CALLEGARI-JACQUES, S. M., and F. M. SALZANo.
1989. Genetic variation within two linguistic
Amerindian groups: Relationship to geography and population size. Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 79(3):313-320.

CHAGNON, N. A. 1976. Genealogy, solidarity,
and relatedness: Limits to local group size
and patterns of fissioning in an expanding
population. Yearbook of Physical Anthropology, 19:95-110.

CHAGNON, N.A., J. V. NEEL, L. R. WEITKAMP,
H. GersHowitz, and M. Ayres. 1970. The
influence of cultural factors on the demography and pattern of gene flow from the Makiritare to the Yanomama Indians. Amer. J.
Phys. Anthrop. 32(3):349-399.,

CHEVERUD, J. M., J. BuETTNER-JaNuscu, and D.
SADE. 1978. Social group fission and the origin of intergroup genetic differentiation
among the Rhesus monkeys of Cayo Santiago. Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 49:449-456.

CHEveRuD, J. M., and J. E. Burxstra. 1978. A
study of intragroup biological change induced by social group fission in Macaca mulatta using discrete cranial traits. Amer. J.
Phys. Anthropol. 48:41-46.

Fix, A. G. 1975. Fission-fusion and lineal effect:
Aspects of the Semai-Senoi of Malaysia.
Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 43:295-302.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

46 Aguiar

——-. 1982. Genetic structure of the Semai, p.
179-204. In M.H. Crawford and J. H.
Mielke (eds.), Current Developments in Anthropological Genetics, Vol. 2, Ecology and
population structure. Plenum Press, New
York.

FLEISCHMAN, M. 1980. An unusual distribution
for height among males in a Warao Indian
village: A possible case of lineal effect.
Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 53:397-405.

GaLLois, D. 1981. Os Waiapi e seu territério.
Belém: Bol. Mus. Par. Emilio Goeldi (sér.
Antrop.) 80.

. 1986. Migracgdo, guerra e comércio: os
Waiapi na Guiana. FFLCH/USP, Sao Paulo.

GaLLois, D., and C. A. Ricarpo. 1983. Povos
indigenas do Brasil 3. Amap4/Norte do Para.
Centro Ecuménico de Documentagao e Informagao, Sao Paulo.

Ga.vao, E. 1960. Areas culturais indigenas no
Brasil: 1900-1959. Bol. Mus. Par. Emilio
Goeldi (sér. Antropol.), 8, Belém.

HARPENDING, H. C., and R. Warp. 1982. Chemical systematics and human evolution, p.
213-256. In M. Nitecki (ed.), Biological aspects of evolutionary biology. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Huaues, A. L. 1988. Evolution and human kinship. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

Kipp, J. R., and K. K. Kipp. 1990. Characterization of the R. Surui and Karitiana at 21
polymorphic DNA loci. Paper presented at
the symposium Recent trends of bioanthropological research among Lowland South
American Indian populations, 59th annual
meeting of the American Association of
Physical Anthropologists, Miami, Florida,
April 3-7.

KoniGcsBerG, L. W., 1988. Migration models of
prehistoric postmarital residence. Amer. J.
Phys. Anthrop. 77:471-482.

LANE, R.A., and A. J. SusLett. 1972. Osteology of social organization: Residence pattern. Amer. Antiquity 37:186-201.

LoukoTKA, C. 1968. Classification of South
American Indian Languages. Latin American Center, University of California, Los Angeles.

MorAn, E. F. 1982. Human adaptability; an introduction to ecological anthropology. Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.

NEEL, J. V. 1967. The genetic structure of primitive human populations. Jap. J. Hum.
Genet. 12:1-16.

. 1970. Village and tribal genetic distances

among American Indians and possible impli
cations for human evolution. Proc. Nat.

Acad. Sci., 65:323-330.

. 1990. Estrutura populacional amerindia

e algumas interpretagdes da evolucdo hu
mana. In W. Neves and R. Nassif (eds.}, Ori
gens, adaptagées e diversidade bioldgicas do
homem nativo da Amazénia. Editora da Uni
 

 

 

 

Social Biology

versidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo.

NEEL, J. V., I. ARENDS, C. BREWER, N. CHAGNON, H. GEersHowlTz, M. LayrissE, Z. LayRISSE, J. MACCLUER, E. MIGLIAZZA, W. OLIVER, F. SALZANO, R. SPIELMAN, R. Warp,
and L. WerTKamp. 1972. Studies on the
Yanomama Indians, p. 96-111. Proc. 4th Int.
Cong. Hum. Genet., Paris.

NEEL, J. V., and F. M. SALZANo. 1966. A prospectus for genetic studies on the American
Indians. Jn P. Baker and J. S. Weiner (eds.),
The biology of human adaptability. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

NEEL, J. V. and F. M. SaLzano. 1967. Further
studies on the Xavante Indians, X. Some
hypotheses-generalization resulting from
these studies. Amer. J. Hum. Genet.
19(4):554-574.

NEEL, J. V., F. M. Satzano, P. C. JUNQUEIRA,
F. Keiter, and D. Maysury-Lewis. 1964.
Studies on the Xavante Indians of the Braziian Mato Grosso. Amer. J. Human.
Genet. 16:52-140.

Ne, M. 1987. Molecular evolutionary genetics.
Columbia Univ. Press, New York.

Neves, W. A. 1984. Paleogenética dos grupos
pré-histé6ricos do litoral sul do Brasil. Ph.D.
thesis, University of S4o Paulo (IBUSP).

Riperro, D. 1957. Culturas e linguas indigenas
no Brasil. Educ. Ciéncias Sociais (Rio de Janeiro) 2(6):5-102.

SALZANO, F. M., and S. M. CALLEGARI-JACQUES.
1988. South American Indians; case study in
evolution. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

SALZANO, F. M., J. V. NEEL, and D. MayBuryLewis. 1967. Further studies on the Xavante
Indians. I. Demographic data on two additional villages: Genetic structure of the tribe.
Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 19:463-489.

SCHADEN, E. 1969. Aculturagaéo indigena. Pioneira/EDUSP, Sao Paulo.

SmousE, P. E., V. Vitztuum, and J. V. NEEL.
1981. The impact of random and lineal fission
on the genetic divergence of small human
groups: A case study among the Yanomama.
Genetics 98:179-197.

SPENCE, M. W. 1974. Residencial practices and
the distribution of skeletal traits in Teotihuac4n, Mexico. Man 9:262-273.

SPIELMAN, R., F. DA Rocua, L. WEITKAMP, R.
Ward, J. V. NEEL, and N. CuaGnon. 1972.
The genetic structure of a tribal population,
the Yanomama [ndians. VII. Anthropometric differences among Yanomama villages.
Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 37:345-356.

THOMPSON, E. A. 1979. Fission models of population variability. Genetics 93:479-495.

THOMPSON, E.’A., and J. V. NEEL. 1978. Probability of founder effect in a tribal population. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 75:14421445.

Vaypba, A. P., and R. Rappaport. 1976. Ecology, cultural and noncultural. In P. Richer
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

Vol. 40, No. 1-2 Amazonian Indians 47

son and S. McEvoy (eds.), Human ecology. WHITEHEAD, N., L. 1988. Lords of the tiger spirit;

Duxbury Press, North Scituate, MA. a history of the Caribs in colonial Venezuela

Warp, R. 1972. The genetic structure of a tribal and Guiana 1498-1820. Foris Publication,
population, the Yanomama Indians. V. Caribbean series, 10, Dordrecht, Holland.
Comparison of a series of genetic networks. | WriGHT,S. 1951. The genetical structure of popAnn. Hum. Genet. 36:21-43. ulations. Ann. Eugen. 15:323-354.

 
