Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Message from the president of the society for the
study of social biology—social biology: Whence
and Whither

John L. Fuller

To cite this article: John L. Fuller (1983) Message from the president of the society for the
study of social biology—social biology: Whence and Whither, Social Biology, 30:1, 112-114, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1983.9988523

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1983.9988523

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Message from the President

of the Society for the Study of Social Biology—
Social Biology: Whence and Whither

John L. Fuller

The Society for the Study of Social
Biology is a lineal descendant of the
American Eugenics Society. The
change of name in 1973 was approved
almost unanimously by the membership, mainly because the word eugenics
had acquired a negative image that was
harming the society. The eugenics
movement was accused of social and
ethnic bias, and a degree of naiveté in
the biological and behavioral sciences.
There may have been justification for
some of this criticism, but such leaders
of the movement as Frederic Osborn
wrote (1972):

The eugenic patterns are being brought
about not by fallible authoritarian controls, of doubtful merit, but by wholly
voluntary unselfconscious, time-tested
evolutionary processes which have
brought man to his present condition. . . .

Osborn may have been overly optimistic, but he advocated a doctrine of free
choice guided by sound social policies
and universal education.

It may be useful at this time to consider our roots tn the idea of eugenics.
The word literally means well-produced
or well-born, and none should disagree
with this objective. We would be happy
if all children were born and reared so as
to become happy, self-reliant, cooperative adults. In spite of what we consider
to be social progress, such a Utopia
evades us. Technological and social
changes over the past few decades have
had both positive and negative influences on the quality of life. Certainly

112

 

the benefits of new technologies have
not been shared equally.

On the positive side are advances in
the treatment and care of those who are
not well-born. Physical rehabilitation
and special education are more widely
available. Many retardates and mentally
ill who a few years ago would have been
hidden away in dismal institutions now
live in environments that offer varied activities, change of scene, and opportunities to work for economic gain. Others
are still in limbo. We know how to ameliorate the effects of some genetic disorders by special diets or hormonal treatments. Surgery can correct some
developmental defects. These advances
are welcome, but to be well-born is better. And there are limits to medical and
psychological intervention. The economic and psychic costs of not being
well-born fall most heavily on the individual and the family, but they are
shared by society as a whole, albeit
somewhat unwillingly.

The approach of the American Eugenics Society to physical and psychological betterment was mainly through
genetics. A statement drafted by a special committee of the Board of Directors
shows this clearly (Allen et al., 1961).

The American Eugenics Society is composed largely of scientists from a number
of current disciplines. Their common interest is to promote the advancement,
discussion, and dissemination of scientific
knowledge of human genetics as it relates
to the welfare and improvement of individuals and populations.

 
 

Vol. 30, No. I

The emphasis of this report is clearly on
genetic selection, but it is not to be exercised by mandate. Instead the report
proposes “institutional arrangements

. which would result in a tendency for
individuals to have more or fewer children in proportion to their success in
their particular environment ... the
result would be. . . a genetic diversification in the process of adapting to the diverse elements of our society.”

When the name of the society was
changed in 1973 the statement of purpose omitted mention of a eugenic proogram. Instead the objective of the organization was defined as furtherance of
cocommunication among the scientific disociplines that are relevant to the trends of
Om . «2 ge
cshuman evolution. These disciplines are
‘=primarily biological, medical and social.
Evolution was not defined in the stateSment, but I assume that it embraced
‘Sboth genetic and cultural changes that
=contribute to the well-being of our spe‘Scies. At present the front cover of Social
SBiology carries this message: To further
Sknowledge of the biological and socio>
‘ecultural forces affecting human popula> tions and their evolution. R. H. Osborne
Stells me that these are the words of the
‘dlate L. C. Dunn.
co ‘ “ .
= There is an important difference be‘Etween the 1961 and the 1973 statements
of purpose. The earlier one advocates

support of programs of social action that
would induce individuals to plan rationally for parenthood. Dunn’s statement
emphasizes the study of dynamic interactions among genetic and environmental factors, but does not specify the
means through which the social order
might be improved. This omission does
not, in my opinion, imply lack of interest
in the application of scientific knowledge to human welfare. It does indicate
restraint in prescribing the way to Uto
ember 2015

oe SS

Dow

Fuller

113

pia, and even implies doubts as to what
Utopia should be. The early eugenics
movement was at times ideological; today’s social biology is pragmatic.

Pragmatism does not mean that social biologists should simply study their
human subjects and report their results
in professional] journals and symposia.
The results of such studies may often
suggest remedial action by governments, private institutions, and individuals. Evaluation of the results of such remedial programs is not a simple task,
but it is important. In complex systems it
is impossible to predict all the effects of
a new procedure, and it may be very difficult to evaluate the costs and benefits.
Unfortunately human social biologists
cannot conduct formal experiments with
a limited number of controlled variables, and subjects whose gerietics and
prior experiences are either similar or
differ on known dimensions. However,
as pragmatists, evaluation is essential.
The rate of social change is probably
greater today than at any time in history,
and this makes the task especially difficult.

Nevertheless, the members of SSSB
must perform the function of monitoring the effects of social, economic, and
biological forces on the quality of human life. Few other groups are as well
qualified with expertise in a wide range
of scientific disciplines including anthropology, ethology, demography, genetics, psychology, and sociology. Its
concerns are international and
intercultural. At a time when social policies in many parts of the world are political issues, information from a pragmatic, nonideological group of scientists
can be important. As a society, SSSB
must remain unpolitical, but members
can exert influence for policies that will
help children to be well-born and well
 
 

114 Message from the President Social Biology

nurtured. In addition to educating each __mine policy. The society’s best years are
other we should strive to educate the _ still ahead if its members have the desire
public, especially that part who deter- to make them so.

REFERENCES

ALLEN, G., D. Kirk, S. P. Scott, H. L. SHapiIro, and B. WaLLaceE. 1961. Statement of
the eugenic position. Eugen. Quart. 8:181184.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 
