Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Book notes

To cite this article: (1993) Book notes, Social Biology, 40:3-4, 288-293, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1993.9988854

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1993.9988854

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

%
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lil Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:45
 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

Book Notes

BEYOND RELATIVISM: SCIENCE AND HuMAN VALUES: By Roger D. Masters.
University Press of New England,
Hanover, NH, 1993. 248 pages.
$24.95, cloth.

A scholar of both the biological and
social sciences, Masters argues that the
modern concept of ‘“‘value free’’ sciene has created a crisis of moral principles. Drawing on classical thinkers,
Masters shows how the ancient approach to science provides an alternative way of understanding nature
and human nature. At the same time,
he shows how advances in scientific
disciplines —including cognitive neuroscience, behavioral ecology, and chaos
theory—challenge the underlying assumptions of ‘“‘value free’ science and
support the alternative perspectives
suggested by the ancient understanding.

Masters presents his theses in three
parts, titled “‘The Nature of Science,”’
‘““The Nature of Facts and Values,’ and
“From Fact to Value.” These 157
pages carry Masters’ train of thought.
Following the text are eighty pages of
notes which provide background information and citations for specialists,
philosophers, and critics.

Masters concludes (p. 154) that
“our common humanity does point to
a core of common principles that can
claim to be natural .... In general,
the standards of right and wrong associated with naturalism are the common
elements found in the teachings of all
major world religions and ethical doctrines.””

  

 

 
  
  
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 

Having noted five limitations of
value-free science, Masters then applies “naturalistic values” to each area
as follows:

1. We should respect the existence
of social and moral norms of cultures
unlike our own. However, this value is
not ‘‘anything goes.”’ Cultures that assert the right to annihilate others, implicitly claim absolute truth for their
own principles and thus violate this
norm.

2. We have a deep psychological
and social need for values, since we
cannot live without expectations concerning our own behavior and that of
others. “The fact is that each of us is
responsible for our moral choices if
only because others will inevitably behave as if we were responsible.”

3. The ubiquity of nonlinearity and
chaos in natural phenomena reminds
us that many of our actions are certain
to have unexpected and unintended results. Since we cannot predict the consequences of our own actions, we are
obligated to consider the possibility
that the deeds of others were in part
unintended. “Toleration and forgiveness of the errors of others is the counterpart of a willingness to take responsibility for our own actions.”

4. The error of the ‘‘nature versus
nurture dichotomy”’ means that education is necessary for the development
of natural potential, which differs from
person to person. ‘“‘We need to tolerate
differences in ability while always demanding more of ourselves than others
are justified in asking.”

288

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

Vol. 40, No. 3-4

5. The impossibility of a definitive
“conquest of nature’’ means that inevitably some social conflicts will be impossible to resolve. We are obligated
insofar as humanly possible to seek fair
resolution according to nature, a “‘natural justice.” ““Morality asks of us selfimposed obligations to achieve justice.”

As Masters comments, no simple
rules provide a universally correct
foundation. He quotes Socrates’ statement at the conclusion of Plato’s Republic that each of us must above ail
seek the capacity and knowlege to distinguish the good and the bad life, and
‘‘so everywhere and always choose the
better from among those that are possible”

The strength of Masters is his interdisciplinary expertise, whether discussing philosophy or functions of the
brain.

Roger Masters is Nelson A. Rockefeller Professor of Government at
Dartmouth College and is general editor of the Gruter Institute Reader in Biology, Law, and Human Social Behavior database.

CANNIBALISM. ECOLOGY AND EvoLuTION AMONG Diverse Taxa: Edited
by Mark A. Elgar and Bernard J.
Crespi. Oxford University Press,
New York, 1992. 361 pages. $75,
cloth.

As the editors state, cannibalism has
been regarded as abnormal behavior,
relatively rare, and its evolution has received relatively little theoretical attention.

The chapters in this volume have a
common theme in attempting to explain why cannibalism occurs in vari
Book Notes

289

ous taxa and in describing the consequences. Its presence and frequency
clearly depends on diverse morphological and behavior factors, combined
with opportunity.

In general, cannibalism refers to the
killing and consumption of either all
or part of an individual of the same
species. It appears to be an important
component of the biology of a broad
distribution of species from lower eukaryotes to higher primates. Cannibalism occurs in the contexts of infanticide, mating and_ courtship,
geontophagy, oophagy, and competitive interactions.

The fifteen chapters of the volume
have been peer reviewed and cover
cannibalism in fish, lower eukaryotes,
gastropods, spiders, beetles, bees, amphibians, birds, rodents, and nonhman
primates. The editors’ introductory essay discusses the ecology and evolution
of cannibalism, and the volume’s next
chapter discusses the dynamics of cannibalistic populations from a foraging
perspective.

The editors point out several reasons, in addition to those of natural history, why cannibalism is worth more
than anecdotal consideration. (1) Identifying the costs and benefits of cannibalism in populations may explain why
it is often confined to only a few species
within a taxonomic group. (2) Cannibalism can be an important source of
mortality in some species and have a
strong density-dependent influence on
the species’ population dynamics. (3)
Cannibalism seems to have been an influential selective agent in forming several components of social and courtship behavior in some species. It may
restrict or enhance evolutionary pathways toward social behavior, and it

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

290

may have been influential in promoting
mechanisms of kin recognition.

Mark A. Elgar is at the Department
of Zoology, University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia. Bernard
J. Crespi is at the Department of Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada.

PREHISTORIC CANNIBALISM AT MANCOS
SMTUMR-2346: By Tim D. White.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1992. 488 pages. $62.50,
cloth.

Human cannibalism ts one of the
most emotionally charged topics in anthropological literature. Tim White’s
analysis of human bones from an Anasazi pueblo in southwestern Colorado,
site SMTUMR-2346, reveals that
nearly thirty men, women, and children were butchered and cooked there
around A.D. 1100. Their bones were
fractured for marrow, and the remains
discarded in several rooms of the
pueblo. By comparing the human skeletal remains with those of animals
used for food at other sites, the author
analyzes evidence for skinning, dismembering, cooking, and fracturing to
infer that cannibalism took place at
Mancos.

As White evaluates claims for cannibalism in ethnographic and archaeological contexts worldwide, he describes how cultural biases can often
distort the interpretation of scientific
data. This book applies and introduces
anatomical, taphonomic, zooarchaeological, and forensic methods in the investigation of prehistoric human behavior. It is an example of how we can
exchange opinion for knowledge.

Book Notes

Social Biology

Taken together with Mark Elgar’s
and Bernard Crespi’s edited volume
Cannibalism: Ecology and Evolution
among Diverse Taxa (Oxford University Press, 1992) reviewed above, we
have a fascinating look at this biological phenomonon across a vast range of
living organisms.

Princton University Press gave the
book the quality format it deserves,
with 182 halftones, 40 line illustrations,
and 17 tables reproduced on coated
stock and in an ample ten by sevenand-a-half inch format.

In his Preface, White comments that
we must study cannibalism with the
same theoretical and methodological
rigor we would employ in studying any
other aspect of human behavior. He
quotes from George Gaylord Simpson’s letters to his family (Univ. of California Press, 1987): “I have nothing
for those whose only approach is emotional and who will always believe what
is pleasant in preference to what is
true, but if anyone cares for the facts,
I intend to know them.” It seems both
a gritty and apt quote, doubled in impact by its source and by the data to
which it is here applied.

Tim D. White is Professor of Anthropology at the University of California at Berkeley. He is author of Human Osteology (Academic Press,
1991),

THE SOCIAL CAGE. HUMAN NATURE AND
THE EVOLUTION OF SocteTy. By Alexandra Maryanski and Jonathan
H. Turner. Stanford University
Press, Stanford, CA, 1993. 213
pages. $39.50, cloth; $12.95, paper.

A wide-ranging new interpretation
of the biological foundations of sociocultural evolution, this book ts a chalDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

Vol. 40, No. 3-4

lenge both to the extremes of sociobiology and to traditional sociological
assumptions about human nature and
modern societies.

The authors’ argument revolves
around a re-analysis of human nature
as it evolved over millions of years of
primate history and a re-assessment of
societal evolution in light of the primate legacy of humans. They propose
that sociobiology overemphasizes selection at the genic level and underemphasizes the emergent dynamics of
social structure and culture, that sociological thought assumes humans are
more social than is warranted by the
empirical evidence on primates, and
that critiques of modern social forms
are largely misguided.

The authors assert that traditional
sociological theories of human nature
and society do not pay sufficient attention to the evolution of “‘big-brained
hominoids,” resulting in assumptions
about humans’ propensity for “‘groupness”’ that go against the record of primate evolution. When this record is
analyzed in detail, and is supplemented
by a review of the social structures of
contemporary apes and the basic types
of human societies (hunter-gathering,
horticultural, agrarian, and industrial),
commonplace criticisms about the dehumanizing effects of industrial society
appear overdrawn, if not incorrect.

The book concludes that the mistakes in contemporary social theory—
as well as much of general social commentary—stem from a failure to analyze humans as “big-brained” apes
with certain phylogenetic tendencies.
This failure is usually coupled with a
willingness to romanticize societies of
the past, notably horticultural and
agrarian systems.

Book Notes

291

If the evolutionary record and data
on contemporary primates are taken
seriously, the modern industrial system
is seen as far more compatible with humans’ primate legacy than either horticultural or agrarian systems. This legacy indicates that humans are far more
individualistic than most social theory
assumes and that humans definitely
prefer situations allowing autonomy,
freedom, and choice.

Alexandra Maryanski is Assistant
Professor of Sociology, and Jonathan
H. Turner is Professor of Sociology, at
the University of California, Riverside.

AIDS AND CONTEMPORARY History:
Edited by Virginia Berridge and
Philip Strong. Cambridge University Press, New York, 1993. 284
pages. $54.95, cloth.

The advent of AIDS has led to a revival of interest in the historical relationship of disease to society. Now,
after ten years, there is a new consciousness of AIDS and history, and of
AIDS itself as an historic event. This is
the starting-point of this new collection
of essays.

Its twin themes are the “prehistory” of the impact of AIDS, and its
subsequent history. The section on the
“pre-history” of AIDS includes articles which analyze the contexts against
which AIDS should be measured.

The second section~on AIDS as
history—presents chapters by historians and policy scientists on such topics
as British and US drugs policy, the
later years of AIDS policies in the UK
and the development of AIDS as a political issue in France

A final chapter looks at the archival
potential in the AIDS area. As a whole
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

292

the volume demonstrates the contribution which historians can make in the
analysis of near-contemporary events.

Virginia Berridge is Senior Lecturer
in History, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, and CoDirector of the AIDS Social History
Programme

Philip Strong is Senior Lecturer in
Sociology, London School of Hygiene
and Tropical Medicine.

MorAL IMAGINATION. IMPLICATIONS OF
COGNITIVE SCIENCE FOR ETHICS: By
Mark Johnson. The University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1993.
300 pages. $29.95, cloth.

Using discoveries of cognitive science, Mark Johnson argues that humans are fundamentally imaginative
moral animals, challenging the view
that morality is simply a system of universal laws dictated by reason. According to the Western moral tradition, we
make ethical decisions by applying
universal laws to concrete situations.
Johnson shows how research in cognitive science undermines this view and
reveals that imagination has an essential role in ethical deliberation.

The Enlightenment idea that reason
creates fixed moral rules that specify
“the right thing to do”’ is mistaken, according to Johnson, because it misses
the ways in which human conceptual
systems are grounded in bodily experience, and it ignores the expansive
and constructive nature of our best
moral thinking. Stnce new findings in
cognitive science explain reasoning in
terms of prototypes, frame semantics,
metaphor, and basic-level experience,
Johnson contends that we must revise
our views of ethics and adopt an alter
Book Notes

Social Biology

native concept of moral reflection—
one that is thoroughly imaginative.

Johnson analyzes contemporary
Western ethics as a complex interweaving of metaphors, images, and narratives that make up our shared “folk
theory” of right and wrong. Even
though morality does not consist primarily of absolute principles, it is not
totally relativistic. Johnson offers an
account of moral reasoning that avoids
the pitfalls of absolutism and relativism
by grounding morality in the evolving
wisdom of our collective experience.
On this view, we face moral dilemmas
by exploring imaginatively a range of
possible actions, instead of discovering
one “correct” solution.

Expanding his studies of human reason in Metaphors We Live By and The
Body in the Mind, Johnson provides
the tools for more practical, realistic,
and constructive moral reflection.

His work is an interesting complement to that of Roger Masters, described above, in Beyond Relativism;
Science and Human Values (University
Press of New England, 1993). Both
find morality in a core of common principles from the collective human experience that can provide us with a range
of possible “moral” actions within a
given situation.

Mark Johnson is chair of the Department of Philosophy at Southern
Illinois University.

TESTING, TESTING. SOCIAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE EXAMINED LIFE: By
F, Allan Hanson. University of California Press, Berkely, CA 1993.
278 pages. $28, cloth.

Hanson provides a fascinating history of “how our-addiction to testing

 

 
 

CY
—

N

ember 20

oO
oO

co

©
CY
av.
om
=
—
CS
‘'S
Ss
oD
oo
O
=
Ce
©
>>
—
N
mi
oO
>
oa
c
~.
va
Oo
vo
oO
co
so
©
—
c
Ss
©
A

Vol. 40, No. 3-4

influences both society and ourselves
as socially defined persons” (p. 1). The
early history of authenticity testing to
ascertain truth or falsehood by trial by
ordeal provides a sobering perspective
on both the concept and result of “‘testing procedures.”

After defining “‘test,”’ and reviewing
the benefits that tests are designed to
achieve, Hanson explores the unintended consequences of testing. People are examined and evaluated less for
qualifications or knowledge they already possess than for what the test results can predict about future actions
or potential behavior.

Hanson’s chapter on intelligence
testing—its development, history, components, and use~is a valuable resource for anyone teaching about
“TQ.” Hanson lucidly explains both
the validity and absurdity of the “IQ”
text and provides his own “‘New Intelligence Test,’’ with nine sections, intended to excel current tests by paying
more attention to practical aspects of
intelligence used in everyday life.

After winning us with the logic of
his New Intelligence Test, and also

Book Notes

 

293

making us laugh, Hanson writes (p.
281): “What happened in our thought
experiment has been the experience of
“intelligence” in the real world. Because of intelligence tests, a variety of
disparate abilities (to do mathematical
problems, to comprehend texts, to
compare shapes, to sort ideas or objects into classes, to define words, to
remember historical events, and to do
all of these things rapidly) have been
lumped together to form a new, unitary mental characteristic called ‘intelligence.”’ ... . Precisely as in our hypothetical example, intelligence has
been fashioned into an objectively real
personal trait by the practice of intelligence testing.”

Hanson devotes his last chapter to
ways in which we can perceive and determine to use testing differently, so
that we, as humans, are in control
rather than allowing testing to control
subliminally who we think we are and
what we want to be.

F. Allan Hanson is Professor of
Anthropology at the University of
Kansas.

 
