Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Reply
William Petersen

To cite this article: William Petersen (1971) Reply, Social Biology, 18:4, 437-438, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1971.9987955

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1971.9987955

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:32
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 18, No. 4

tired at full salary within ten to twelve
years time. Thus, when they came to the
United States they only had ten to twelve
years left to contribute to a teacher’s pension fund. As a result, except for those at
the New School for Social Research where
special arrangements were made for them,
the great majority of refugee scholars
found their pension income at the age of
65 to be somewhere between $30 and $100

Reply

William Petersen

Depariment of Preventive Medicine
Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio

The Nazi holocaust has resulted, understandably but unfortunately, in a continuing tendency to view the past in terms of
simplistic stereotypes. Instead of the complex reality, in which Party, state, and
army fought each other sometimes viciously, and in which many supposed
zealots were thoroughly corruptible, Nazi
society is still usually pictured as entirely
monolithic. The victims of Nazism, similarly, differed greatly in their politics, their
motivations for leaving Europe (if they
did), their personalities, and their behavior.
One of the criticisms I made of Fleming
and Bailyn’s compendium is that it lacked
some of this richness, and Dr. Bernstein
now demands that the stereotypes be restored.

I wish she had read my short review
a bit more carefully, since many of her
points are based on nothing more than an
extrapolation of my particulars into too
broad generalizations. IJ wrote that it “was

Communications

 

437

a month, less than even welfare payments
in New York City. This lack of security in
old age was the chief inducement for most
of the refugee scholars who went back to
claim their German pensions. For the
younger scholars there were offers of positions of a rank higher than they could
ever expect to obtain as outsiders with
foreign accents in the United States.

not always the case” that refugee migrants
were motivated “exclusively by political
oppression”; in her paraphrase, “many”
immigrating scholars came to the United
States only “in order to better themselves.”
I wrote that the extraordinarily cordial
welcome that psychoanalysts received in
this country induced many of them #¢o
stay—not, as Dr. Bernstein translates,
that they ‘came’ for monetary reasons. I
wrote very specifically of two persons—
Paul Lazarsfeld and Franz Boas—that
they were “adept at academic in-fighting.”
In Dr. Bernstein’s extension, this appears
as: “According to Prof. Petersen the refugee professors were especially ‘adept at
academic in-fighting.’ ”

Her points about the political views of
the refugees are perhaps the crux of Dr.
Bernstein’s letter. I wrote that “the intellectuals’ innocence was partial’; she
represents me as having written that “the
refugee scholars” were not innocent vicDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

 

438

tims. Some indeed supported the Weimar
democracy, and Dr. Bernstein is able to
cite six examples from her personal background. More generally, however, the
Weimar Republic “could never enlist the
wholehearted loyalty of all, or even many,
of its beneficiaries . . . . The intellectuals
almost without exception opposed the
government .... The most effective enemy
of the Weimar Republic was the civil war
fought within the Republican left.” These
sentences are quoted from the first essay
in the book I reviewed, by Peter Gay
{also a German-born Jew and, more to
the point, a competent historian), who
documented this appraisal to the full in
his subsequent book on Weimar culture.
That Dr. Bernstein should want to challenge the statement that Herbert Marcuse
and his colleagues were part of the “totalitarian left” (contrary to her paraphrase, I did not use the designation
“Communist”) is a bit bizarre. To quote
Professor Gay again, the Institut fir
Sozialforschung in Frankfurt was “securely
in the hands of Marxists, . . . left-Hegelian
to the core.”

Communications

 

Social Biology

Dr. Bernstein’s final point about the
ages, respectively, of émigrés who returned
to Europe and refugees who did not, sounds
plausible and may be valid. But this kind
of question, as I pointed out in my review,
was never posed by the book’s editors,
who therefore offered no hypotheses even
on points quite elementary in the professional analysis of human migration.

As an American whose association with
totalitarianism has always been at a distance, I try not to judge the emotional and
intellectual scars that first-hand experiences
have often produced. But that the AntiDefamation League should have found it
appropriate to protest this review is something altogether different. Since I regard
as valid neither the Nazis’ overall calumnies nor a total glorification, I tried to
break up such large categories as “the
refugees,” “the Jews,” into more pertinent
groups. As I understand it, this attempt
to distinguish, to reject all stereotypes
whether positive or negative, is central to
the struggle against anti-Semitism. I invite those who now tell me it is defamation
to reconsider their first premises.

 
