Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Prenatal screening for neural tube defects:
Perceptions of potential recipients

Selwynn B. Howard & Verle E. Headings

To cite this article: Selwynn B. Howard & Verle E. Headings (1991) Prenatal screening for
neural tube defects: Perceptions of potential recipients, Social Biology, 38:3-4, 258-265, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1991.9988793

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1991.9988793

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 5

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:44

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

 

Prenatal Screening for Neural
Tube Defects: Perceptions
of Potential Recipients

 

Selwynn B. Howard and Verle E. Headings

Division of Medical Genetics

Department of Pediatrics and Child Health
Howard University College of Medicine
Washington, D.C.

ABSTRACT: The interpretation of prenatal screening and follow-up diagnostic testing for neural
tube defects is relatively complex and presents unusual demands in terms of informed utilization
by pregnant women. Such demands could impact differentially on individuals of different
socioeconomic status or cultural values. Accordingly, a two-part questionnaire, interrupted by
presentation of educational material on neural tube defects and prenatal screening, was presented to female sophomore medical students and to reproductive-age women whose children
were served at Howard University Hospital. Student subjects favored prenatal testing, whereas
clinic subjects were divided on testing both before and after reading the educational material.
Both groups anticipated prenatal screening in future pregnancies, but clinic subjects were
ambiguous about the need for diagnostic follow-up after the determination of high maternal
serum alpha-fetoprotein. Clinic subjects were more hesitant than students to employ abortion as
a means of intervention and did not distinguish between spina bifida and anencephaly in this

regard.

Neural tube closure defects
(NTD’s) are among the most common
and most disabling of congenital malformations. Incidence differs among
some populations and clearly exhibits a
distribution of occurrence within families congruent with multifactorial inheritance (Toriello, 1983). Maternal
serum alpha-fetoprotein (MSAFP)
screening for NTD’s is currently the
most promising approach to preventing these disorders (Brock, 1982).
However, the approach as a screening
strategy is unprecedented in several respects in that it is offered to entire
pregnancy populations, the level of the
measured entity (MSAFP) is subject to
several variables in addition to NTD’s,
and there is a high false positive rate
(Brock, 1982; Macri, 1986).

These factors place an unusual demand on the pregnant woman as a po
tential recipient of such screening since
she is expected to accommodate to a
relatively complex follow-up diagnostic protocol when the MSAFP is high,
which occurs in 3-7 per cent of pregnancies. Furthermore, given that a
considerable fraction (about 20 per
cent) of pregnancies with NTD are not
accompanied by elevated MSAFP and
about 95 per cent of elevations are
shown to be false positives upon diagnostic testing, there is substantial opportunity for confusion and anxiety by
the recipient of the screening. Anxiety
by pregnant women about the false
positive elevations has been documented (Burton, 1985). Finally, the
choice of intervention offered to parents when the prenatal diagnosis of an
NTD is confirmed is either midtrimester abortion or to begin making
special preparations for a disappoint
258

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 38, No. 3-4

ing pregnancy outcome. There is presently no preventive or curative treatment in the traditional sense.

We postulated that this series of demands could impact differentially on
individuals of different socioeconomic
status and cultural values, in particular
those variables which distinguish
health professionals and their innercity clients. A number of educational
brochures dealing with MSAFP
screening have been designed for populations with relatively low literacy.
However, literacy level alone is not
likely to account for preferences people hold regarding MSAFP screening.
We are unaware of studies which address potential differences in preferences about MSAFP screening between health care professionals and
their inner-city clients. If such differences are identified, any correlated
variables can then be sought with a
view to ensuring that decisions which
clients make about screening are based
on perceptions which bear a reasoned
relationship to their personal risk budgets (Fried, 1970).

The ethical requirement that all candidates for a service be offered equal
opportunity to make informed decisions about that service can only be
met if they are informed in a manner
which is tailored to their perceptions
(Fry, 1987). In order to do this, health
professionals must understand how
their own interpretations and preferences about a new diagnostic technology and intervention strategy may
differ from that of their clients. Accordingly, this pilot study addressed
the following objectives concerning
reproductive-age women drawn from
an inner-city African-American population of Washington, D.C., served by

Neural Tube Defects

 

259

Howard University Hospital as well as
a sample of their future physicians, female sophomore medical students at
Howard University College of Medicine: (1) to ascertain existing awareness in the two populations sampled
about NTD’s and prenatal screening
for such disorders; (2) to test the hypothesis that written and pictorial
information about NTD’s enhances
preferences for screening and/or intervention by abortion; (3) to identify
how inner-city women and female
medical students differ from one another in regard to interpretation and
acceptance of prenatal screening for
NTD’s and abortion as an intervention; (4) to test the hypothesis that type
of NTD influences preference about
abortion as a method of intervention
differently among the two groups of
subjects.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

RESEARCH SUBJECTS

Women in the reproductive age
range who brought their children to the
pediatric outpatient clinics at Howard
University Hospital were serially invited to respond to a questionnaire
while they waited for their clinic appointments. Those who agreed to participate were taken to a room adjacent
to the clinic to assure privacy while
subject and investigator read through
the questionnaire together. This sampling design samples those females
who are candidates for future MSAFP
screening and who manifest interest in
the health of their present and future
children, given that they utilize the
clinic services available for their children. An inescapable limitation of the
sampling design is self-selection since

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

260

those persons who are relatively uninterested in the study may choose to decline to participate. Ninety-five per
cent of this population sample identifies itself as African-American and is
geographically located in census tracts
of the inner city where mean household income is marginal.

During approximately the same
time frame, the questionnaire was presented to female sophomore medical
students at Howard University following the conclusion of a regularly scheduled class session. This sample of
professionals proved to have the advantages of being similar to the clinic
population sample in terms of mean
age and number of previous pregnancies. They not only are of an age which
makes them probable candidates for
future MSAFP screening, but they will
also during their clinical training be ex
pected to offer MSAFP screening and’

interpret its significance for their patients.

QUESTIONNAIRE

A 17-item questionnaire was developed by the investigators. The first
nine questions were followed by descriptive text and photographs of
NTD’s, a description of MSAFP
Screening and diagnostic tests for
NTD’s, and the choices available for
intervention when an NTD is identified
in the mid-trimester fetus. Eight questions followed the educational section.
Nontechnical language was employed
where possible and,.when necessary,
technical terms were defined.

The educational segment of the
questionnaire was designed to assist informed decision-making about prenatal MSAFP screening and intervention
for identified cases of NTD. Two of the

Howard and Headings

Social Biology

post-education questions were repeats
of the pre-education questions. Responses to the two sets were tested for
independence by the chi-square in order to identify whether there were
“acute phase” effects of the new information on preference about MSAFP
screening and abortion as a means of
intervention for NTD’s. The absence
of such effects would be consistent with
one of two hypotheses—either the content or format of the educational segment did not effectively communicate
new information, or there were other
variables which took precedence for
the respondents concerning MSAFP
screening and intervention in NTD’s.
The questionnaire was informally
pretested with a small sample of medical students to minimize ambiguity of
vocabulary and grammatical constructions. When it was presented to the
clinic subjects, one of the investigators
read the questions to the subjects in order to minimize any limitations of poor
reading skills and to provide an opportunity for clarification of questions.
These two procedures should tailor the
questionnaire to the level of exchange
which commonly occurs between physician and patient. Incidentally, this is
not assumed to be an optimum exchange. All statistical treatment of
data employed the chi-square test. This
study, including the questionnaire design, was approved by the Institutional
Review Board of Howard University.

RESULTS

The two samples, clinic subjects and
medical student subjects, were similar
in mean age but differed in regard to
education (Table 1). The clinic subjects were essentially uninformed
University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

|

Downloaded by

 

Vol. 38, No. 3-4

about NTD’s, whereas one-half of the
student sample reported knowing a fair
amount about NTD’s (Table 2). Despite their knowledge of NTD’s, twothirds of the medical students knew
nothing about MSAFP screening;
about 90 per cent of clinic subjects
were in this category.

Preferences about prenatal testing
and intervention by abortion for a detected birth defect before and immediately after education by brochure

Neural Tube Defects

261

yielded several significant conclusions
(Tables 3 and 4). Neither clinic subjects nor student subjects changed
their preferences on these two Issues as
a result of the information presented.
Students almost unanimously favored
prenatal testing, whereas the clinic
subjects reflected some measure of reservation, and this difference remained
essentially unchanged after the educational brochure (Table 3). Concerning
abortion as an intervention for NTD’s,

TABLE 1
CHARACTERISTICS OF RESEARCH SUBJECTS

Clinic Subjects Student Subjects

Characteristics (33)
Age

Mean yea%S...........ceceeeeeeee 25.7+5.8 23.7+1.6

Range....ceccscsccccssceceecseeees 17-40 21-28

Median years .........ceceeeeees 24 24
Education

MEAaN YEa¥S.......cscccecsceesoes 11.6 17.8
Number of pregnancies

MEAN .......cccccccceeecetsceensens Dede 2.18

FRAN BGs cannes cxnasnes peanwen ane coco 0-10 0-3
Subjects with history of 6 2

elective abortion...............

TABLE 2 |
AWARENESS OF NEURAL TUBE DEFECTS AND PRENATAL SCREENING?
Clinic Subjects Student Subjects

Category of Awareness (31) (33)
NTD’s

Fail AMOUNL........ccccccecceccescsseeceecceceeses 0 14

Very little...........cccceeseeseeesscsesceeesenewees 13 17

Nothing ........cccccseeececeeeescecececeseneesees 18 2

(Chi-square = 27,3, df=2, P < 0.0001)

Screening

YES oo cecccccccuccecccccceccesccccscecseectesenecsees 4 11

ING «iinet $009500508 | eG RREG HES REET ee PETE HE Ren 27 22

(Chi-square = 3.8, df=1, P > 0.1)

*Chi-square tests for differences between clinic and student subjects concerning NTD’s and screening are given in parentheses.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

 

262 Howard and Headings

there was a substantially greater uncertainty than for prenatal testing in both
samples, but more so in the clinic sample (Table 4). In terms of anticipated
actions in future pregnancies, clinic
and student subjects were similar in
their choices to utilize screening (Table
5). However, clinic subjects were less
persuaded than were student subjects
about the need for diagnostic follow-up
on positive MSAFP screen results.
When projecting use of abortion for

 

Social Biology

NTD’s in a future pregnancy, the clinic
subjects did not distinguish significantly between spina bifida and anencephaly, whereas the student subjects
more commonly preferred abortion for
anencephaly than for spina bifida (Table 6).

DISCUSSION

Several conclusions can be drawn
from this study which deserve further

TABLE 3
RESPONDENTS IN FAVOR OF A PRENATAL TEST WHICH ALLOWS A PHYSICIAN TO DISCOVER
WHETHER A DEVELOPING BABY Has A DEFEcT”

DECISION CATEGORY

Clinic subjects
FAVOT .....cccceteeceececcccccnsccsseeenenevsceereres
Do not favor.....ccccceccceccecteerenteeeeseenenss
Don’t KnOwW ......ccccececccecceseseensccennsceenes

Student subjects
FAVOL ......ccceeeeecrecnccccceesetcecenccceeceecees
Do MOt favOr.........ccscceccccertevectcesrererees
Don’t Know ......ccccccccceecsececsereceeecseenees

No. or Decisions BEFoRE AND AFTER EDUCATION

Before After
(31) (31)
21 23
4 5
6 3
(33) (33)
32 32
0 0
1 I

(Chi-square = 8.0, df=2, P < 0.02)

"Chi-square test for difference between clinic and student subjects after education about NTD’s is given in parentheses.
q J & p

TABLE 4
RESPONDENTS IN FAVOR OF TERMINATION OF A PREGNANCY WHEN SEVERE DEFORMITIES
ACCOMPANY A NEURAL TUBE DEFEcT®

Decision CaTEGORY

Clinic subjects
FAVOT 4 ccesee ase 69566054 Son eeiee one peer ens enh oans amaeRA

FaVOE as exe xans 066 b8b00ne empeniic dadbhus nbd b0b0006 0086

No. oF Dectstons BEForeE AND AFTER EDUCATION

Before After
(31) (30)
9 10
6 7
16 13
(33) (32)
24 26
0 ' 0
9 6

(Chi-square = 16.6, df=2, P < 0.0005)

“Chi-square test for difference between clinic and student subjects after education about NTD's is given in parentheses.

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 38, No. 3-4

Neural Tube Defects

 

263

TABLE 5
RESPONDENTS WHO WouLD UTILIZE SCREENING AND FOLLOW-UP TESTING IN FUTURE PREGNANCIES?

Decision Category

Screening

Clinte SUD [COS suse ses vsasaus sama 4 escnys ews seen ewe wees
Student SuUbjOCts : cesses sessses wes sews vans vas vena ves vaes

Follow-up testing

CUTS SUDJCCESs saias sas sani nnd somence peeonns oes teas res tees
Student subjects ......ccsscsssssescosscscsseneseseeerens

streooveveoecs

1 Fea 8 31 0 2

Yes No Don’t Know
sre.sqpy.g wate 18 4 9
tea sewawme 8 26 1 6

(Chi-square = 3.8, df=2, P > 0.1)
20 2 9

(Chi-square = 8.0, df=2, P < 0.02)

*Chi-square tests for differences between clinic and student subjects concerning screening and follow-up testing are given in paren
theses.

TABLE 6
RESPONDENTS WHO WouLD UTILIZE ABORTION FOR NEURAL TUBE DEFECTS?’

Decision Category

Spina bifida
YES wer ection vid ene masio mn sido mess eoasice wnt en _

Clinic Subjects Student Subjects
14 14
8 5
8 14
10 25
9 1
11 7

“Chi-square tests for differences in preferences about abortion between spina bifida and anencephaly are chi-square =1.2, df=2,
P > 0,5 for clinic subjects and chi-square =8.1, df=2, P < 0.02 for student subjects.

investigation and which could be of significance for the design of education
prior to MSAFP screening as well as
for the education of medical students
about the perspectives of their innercity patients. Female medical students
are more oriented than are clinic subjects drawn from an inner-city AfricanAmerican population of similar age. toward prenatal screening, follow-up
diagnostic testing when a screen is positive, and use of abortion as a method
of intervention in NTD’s, with a higher
frequency of use projected for anencephaly.

This distinction is made more significant by the fact that two-thirds of the
Students reported no awareness of
MSAFP screening prior to their encounter with this questionnaire. Yet,
both before and after reading the brochure, essentially all of them favored
such screening. Clearly, the current intervention model for NTD’s is more
acceptable to students than it is to one
group of clients they may serve. If
young physicians and clinic subjects
reading the same information written
for lay-persons interpret its significance and acceptability differently,

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

264 Howard and Headings

then it should be noted that the physician may be at risk for either not making the information conceptually accessible to patients or, conversely, for
assuming a directive role in decisions
about intervention for NTD’s.

The pattern of responses by clinic
subjects present some indications for
further investigation. The absence of
an apparent effect of the educational
information on preferences about
screening, diagnostic follow-up testing,
or intervention for anencephaly may
reflect limitations of the educational
material presented to the clinic subjects. This problem is being investigated in another study in regard to
variables such as vocabulary level employed and time frame over which the
educational process occurs. An important objective in the design of the educational material was to convey the
necessity of follow-up diagnostic tests
when the MSAFP screen is positive,
given that the screen has a 95-per-cent
false-positive rate. It is cause for some
concern that whereas clinic subjects
did not differ from medical students in
preference about MSAFP screening,
they less often would select follow-up
testing for a positive screen.

The educational material included
risk probabilities as well as pictures
and text portraying distinctions in morbidity for anencephaly and spina bifida. This difference in morbidity did
not elicit different preferences about
pregnancy termination for clinic subjects as it did for medical students, suggesting that other factors more often
influence preference among clinic subjects. Numerical probability statements about genetic risk are subject to
being assessed incorrectly, and in part
this is a function of educational level

Social Biology

achieved (Chase, 1986). Thus, the process of risk assessment itself may differ
between the two groups of subjects in
this study.

Another source of.discrepancies between clinic subjects and medical student subjects in preferences for screening, testing, and intervention may be
different styles of reasoning about their
personal risk budgets. It has been postulated that each individual approaches cost-laden decisions with reference to a personal risk budget
(Fried, 1970). Thus, the discrepancies
in preferences noted between the two
categories of subjects could reflect differences in how short-term and longterm costs of a decision are estimated.
Costs in this framework may span the
spectrum of monetary, moral, social,
psychological, and religious variables
which are pertinent to the decision for
the individual. It should be noted that
clinic subjects had experienced threefold more elective abortions than had
medical student subjects. This finding
suggests that the less frequently stated
preference by clinic subjects for intervention in anencephaly (Table 6) may
not be a function of greater reservation
about abortion per se. However, further study is required in order to understand to what extent the respective
elements of a personal risk budget
noted above influence preferences
about screening and prenatal diagnosis
for NTD’s. _

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by a Summer
Medical Student Research Fellowship from
The March of Dimes to Selwynn Howard
and from the Summer Student Research
Program at Howard University College of
Medicine.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 38, No. 3-4

Neural Tube Defects

 

265

REFERENCES

Brock, D. J. H. 1982. Effectiveness of prenatal
screening. Birth Defects Original Article Series 18: No. 3A, 109-120.

Burton, B.K., R.E. Dittarp, and E.N.
Crark. 1985. The psychological impact of
false positive elevations of maternal serum
alpha-fetoprotein. Amer. J. Obstet. Gynecol, 151:77-82.

Cuase, G. A., R. R. Fapen, N. A. HoLtzMan,
A. J. CHwaLow, C. O. Leonarp, C. Lopes,
and K. Qualp. 1986. Assessment of risk by
pregnant women: Implications for genetic
counseling and education. Soc. Biol. 33:57
FRIED, C. 1970. An anatomy of values. Harvard

University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Fry, S. T. 1987. The ethical dimensions of policy
for prenatal diagnostic technologies: The
case of maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein
screening. Adv. Nurs. Sci. 9:44-55.

Macrzi, J. N. 1986. Critical issues in prenatal maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein screening for
genetic anomalies. Amer. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 155:240-246.

TorIELLO, H. V., and J. V. Hicains. 1983. Occurrence of neural tube defects among first-,
second-, and third-degree relatives of
probands: Results of a United States study.
Amer. J. Med. Genet. 15:601-606.
