Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Effect of father's education on child's cognitive
ability

C.C. Li

To cite this article: C. C. Li (1986) Effect of father's education on child's cognitive ability, Social
Biology, 33:3-4, 316-321, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1986.9988648

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1986.9988648

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lal Article views: 4

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:41

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

 

Brief Reports

Effect of Father’s Education on
Child’s Cognitive Ability

C.C. Li

Department of Biostatistics
Graduate School of Public Health
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA

 

 

ABSTRACT: In studying the effect of father’s education on child’s cognitive ability, we find that
some models of analysis yield a negative effect, which does not seem plausible according to our
current understanding of the nature of the two variables. Two new models are proposed to take
account of the biological relationships between parents and children. The analyses based on
these new models show a positive effect of father’s education on child’s IQ scores. While the
results of the proposed models become more plausible, it cannot be claimed as “‘correct,”’ because there is no conclusive and permanent “‘proof” in empirical sciences.

The possible effects of fathers’ education on the development of cognitive
abilities of their children has long beena
subject of study by social scientists.
However, the results and the interpretations of such studies are not always clear
or consistent for a variety of reasons.
The writer, not being a student of social
sciences, will not review the general
problem of the effect of fathers’ education on their childrens’ IQ scores. The
limited purpose of this paper is to introduce biological considerations to the
father-son relationship. In the example
to be considered, it will be seen that the
incorporation of biological relationships
does make the results of certain studies
more plausible.

MULTIPLE REGRESSION MODEL

In a comprehensive book on the effect of family and schooling in America,
Jencks et al (1972) have included the
study of the effect of father’s education

 

on their children’s IQ scores at age 11.
In the section on this particular subject,
the analysis was based on six correlations among four variables: C =
father’s occupation, D = father’s education, P = father’s IQ score, and
Q = child’s IQ score at age 11. The six
estimated true correlations are given in
Table 1.

The model adopted for the influence
of father’s characteristics (C, D, P) on
their sons (Q) is ordinary multiple regression: Q=aC+®8D+yP + residual, where (a, B, ‘y) are standardized
partial regression coefficients (path
coefficients). These path coefficients
may be readily found by solving the
three standardized normal equations,
using the numerical values of correlations given in Table 1:

a + Br(C, D) + yr(C, P) = r(C, Q)
ar(C, D) + B + yr(D, P) = r(D, Q)
ar(C, P) + Br(D, P) + y = r(P, Q)

The solutions are shown in Figure 1.

316

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 33, No. 3-4

Brief Reports 317

TABLE 1

ESTIMATED TRUE CORRELATIONS BETWEEN CHARACTERISTICS
OF NATIVE WHITE NONFARM MALeEs.?

 

Father's
Occupation
Variables Cc
Father’s education, D.......... 0.646

Father’s occupation, C.........
Father’s IO score, P ...........

aExcerpted from Jencks et al., 1972, p. 337, B~2.

.680

Father’s Child’s
1Q Score 1Q Score
P Q
0.680 0.345
0.502 0.357

0.522

 

= 5vo .84

U

Fic. 1.—The multiple regression model of child’s IQ (Q) on father’s education (D), father’s occupation (C), and father’s IQ (P). The letter U with a short arrow represents the residual. (after Jencks et al.,

1972, p. 340, Fig. B-3.)

On examining such results and remembering that the simple correlation
between father’s education and child’s
IQ is r(D, Q) = +0.345, the authors
commented: ‘‘Unfortunately, the
results are not at all plausible. One of
the two status measures (father’s education) takes on an appreciable negative
coefficient. This suggests that we have

underestimated the correlation between
father’s education and son’s IQ, (or)
overestimated the correlation between
father’s education and father’s JQ, or
both.” While these possibilities exist, I
think the ordinary multiple regression
model itself is largely responsible for the

negative coefficient (—0.114) from fa
ther’s education to child’s IQ. The next

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

 

318

section offers an alternative model, in
which there will be no such negative
coefficient.

PARENT-CHILD CORRELATION

We may view the parent-child correJation at three consecutive stages which
may be called L, Y, Z, in that order:
L = at the gene level, Y = at the genotype level, and Z = at the phenotype
level. If the gene effects are simply additive (L level), the parent-child correlation is 1/2. If there is dominance at the
genotype Y level, the parent-child correlation will be lower, being (4/2) g?,
where gis a fraction depending on domi
father’s L

1/2

child’s

Brief Reports

 

Social Biology

nance. Finally, if there are environmental effects on the Z phenotype, the
parent-child correlation will be even
lower, being (1/2) g*h*, where A is another fraction, depending on the magnitude of the environmental effect. Details of these statements and their
justifications may be found in Li (1975,
Chap. 8 and Fig. 256).

In certain models of correlation between relatives, the values of g and h
cannot be found separately because they
always appear together as one quantity,
gh. This is the case for the parent-child
correlation we shall consider. In our example (Fig. 2) we shall write only / for
brevity instead of the more complete ex
Fic. 2.—A model in which there is no direct path from father’s IQ (P) to child’s IO (Q). They are
connected via their genotypes (L) whose correlation is known to be 1/2 on the assumption of additive gene
effects. Meaning of other variables remains the same asin Figure 1, .

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

 

Vol, 33, No. 34

ptession gh. This is simply a matter of
notation and is not the same as assuming
g=l.
We now consider father’s IO (P) and
on’s JQ (Q), In the multiple regression
model (Fig. 1), there ts a direct path
from Pto Q. In Figure 2, that direct path
is being replaced by indirect paths going
through the father’s and son’s genes (L).
This is the crucial feature of our model.
The two status measures, C and D, are
then connected with both P and QO as
shown in Figure 2. In this path diagram,
we use only one “unanalyzed” correlation, viz.,r(C, D) = 0.640. Hence there
are five path coefficients to be found
from the following equations:

r(Q, C) =a + 0,64b = 0.357
r(Q,D) = 0.64a + b = 0.345
r(P, C) = c + 0.64d = 0.502
r(P, D) = 0.64c + d = 0.680
r(P, Q) = Ghyh? + ac + bd
+ 0,64ad + 0.64bc = 0.522

The meaning of the path coefficients a,
b, c, d, and h, as well as their numerical
solutions are indicated in Figure 2,
These equations are particularly easy to
solve, noting the first four equations
form two pairs, and each pair may be
solved independently. Now we see that
the direct effect of father’s education D,
to child’s IQ score is b = 0.20 instead of
B = ~—0.114 as in Figure 1. The value of
the combined heritability of IQ scores is
h? = 0.545 and h = 0.738, which is not

Pout of line when compared with many

other estimates of heritability. The new
residual coefficient u = 0.55 is much
smaller than the residual u = 0.84 in
Figure 1.

OCCUPATION AS A
CONSEQUENCE

Although the essential feature of Fig
Brief Reports

319

ure 2 is the connection h(1/2)h between
P and Q, there are other minor features
we may also discuss. For instance, orcus
pation Cis represented as a cause for father’s IQ in Figure 2, while one may
equally argue that occupation is a consequence of one’s IQ. The path diagram in
Figure 3 is an attempt to examine the
consequences of replacing C» P by

P » C, In this diagram, we use only one

correlation as a path coefficient, viz,, d
(from D to P) = 0.68 = r(D, P) and
there are five path coefficients to be
found from appropriate equations. We
shall omit the full details and will just
point out that the valties of a = 0.23 and
b = 0,20 in Figure 3 remain the same as
those in Figure 2, This may be seen from

the following equation:
r(Q, C) =a + bt + bds
=a+ b(t + ds)
=a+br(C, D)

= q + b(0.64) = 0.357

which is the first equation of the model
in Figure 2. A similar situation exists for
the second equation for r(Q, D). The
two equations ins and talso form a pair.
Finally, r(P, Q) = GC/2ah? +a r(P,
C) + br(P, D) = 0.522, from which we
obtain it = 0.74, the same as jn Figure 2.

The analysis above shows that treating occupation C as a consequence of P
instead of a cause for P changes the coefficients of determination of P but does
not alter the determination of Q.

Now, a general comment about the h
coefficient from genes to phenotype. In
both cases (Fig. 2 and 3) we have assumed that the : value for fathers is the
same as that for sons. However, the father’s phenotype is observed at mature
age whereas the son’s phenotype is observed at age 11. Conceivably, these two
h coefficients may not be the same. Indeed, this may very well be the case. If

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

320 Brief Reports

1/2

Social Biology

 

Fic. 3.—Model similar to Figure 2 except that occupation (C) is regarded as a consequence of education (D) and IQ scores (P), instead of as a cause. The path coefficients a, b, and h remain the same as

those in Figure 2. The residual is also the same.

so, let hy and hz be the respective coefficients for fathers and sons. In our example, these two coefficients always occur as one quantity; and what we have
found is the value of h? = Ayhy. Hence,
the value of h given in the path diagrams
is the geometric mean of h, and hp.

DISCUSSION

In empirical studies there is no such
thing as a “‘correct”’ model, as new observations are forthcoming continuously. The best an empirical scientist
can hope for is that the new results more

or less ‘“‘confirm”’ certain old results,
thus corroborating a certain model (hypotheses). The corroboration, however,
does not constitute a conclusive or permanent proof as in the deductive science.

In empirical studies, we are concerned with the plausibility of a model
most of the time. The plausibility of a
model is based on our current understanding of the nature of the variables
under study. In the present example,
our current understanding is that a father’s education would help (at least
would not hinder) the development of
   
   
 
     
  
   

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Vol. 33, No. 3-4

the cognitive abilities in his child. When
a model yields a negative path coef
ficient from father’s education to child’s 
IQ scores, the authors conclude without
hesitation that the results are not at all
plausible (not amenable to any explanation based on our current knowledge of
the variables).

The two models proposed in this paper do make the path coefficient from
father’s education to child’s IQ positive.
However, all we can claim at this stage
of research is that the proposed models
are more plausible than the original one.
Not much more than this can be said. In
fact, a number of other models may be
constructed with the given four variables and six correlations. Probably,
none of them 1s “‘correct,” especially in
view of the complicated nature of variables such as education and occupation.
The only positive aspect of the proposed
models is the incorporation of the genetic relationship between a parent and
his child. It is this feature that makes the

Brief Reports

 

321

path coefficient from father’s education
to son’s IQ positive.

It might be argued that the parentchild correlation at the L level is 1/2 only
when the parents are random mating
with respect to IO scores; under assortative mating that correlation might be
considerably higher than indicated in
the model. This is very likely true. A review of the five equations derived from
Figure 2 shows that the path coefficients
a and b are found from the first pair of
equations; c and d are determined by
the second pair of equations; and the
value of h? is obtained from the fifth
equation, using the known values of a,
b, c, d. Hence, if we replace r(L,
L) = 1/2 by a higher value, it will decrease the value of ?, without affecting
the other four coefficients. For example,
letting r(L, L) = 3/4, a very high correlation, we will find 4? = 0.36, k = 0.60,
and the path coefficient from father’s D
to child’s Q remains positive: b = 0.20,
the same as before.

REFERENCES

JENCKS, C., et al. 1972. Inequality. A reassessment of the effect of family and schooling in
America. Basic Books Inc. Publishers, New
York and London.

Li, C. C. 1975. Path Analysis: a primer. Boxwood Press, Pacific Grove, California.

 

 
