Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

A genetic study of syndactyly in Utah

Charles M. Woolf & Robert M. Woolf

To cite this article: Charles M. Woolf & Robert M. Woolf (1973) A genetic study of syndactyly in
Utah, Social Biology, 20:3, 335-346, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1973.9988062

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1973.9988062

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB arr | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
alil Article views: 1
N
Q View related articles 4

wa Citing articles: 3 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

A Genetic Study of Syndactyly in Utah

 

Charles M. Woolf and Robert M. Woolf

Department of Zoology, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona; and
Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Latter-day Saints

Hospital, Salt Lake City Utah

As part of a genetic study of certain
types of congenital malformations in Utah,
family histories were obtained for Caucasian propositi classified as having polydactyly or syndactyly. These propositi were
obtained from hospital records made available by physicians. Each propositus was a
surgical case. The objective of the study.
was to gain information that would be of
value in genetic counseling. This study was
carried out in a population that is predominantly Mormon (Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints). The relative
stability of the Mormon population in the
area, strong family ties, and an interest
in genealogy, facilitate family history
studies of this type among Mormon people
in the state of Utah. The propositi were
sorted into two groups: (1) polydactyly
cases without associated syndactyly, and
(2) syndactyly cases with or without associated anomalies. The results of the polydactyly study have been published (Woolf
and Woolf, 1970).

Plastic and orthopedic surgeons frequently encounter patients with syndactyly.
The following questions may be asked:
What types of syndactyly have a genetic
basis? What modes of inheritance are
present? What types of syndactyly are
encountered in a sample of surgical cases?

What proportion of patients with a given
type of syndactyly have a family history of
the same type? Meaningful genetic counseling must consider that syndactyly is characterized by phenotypic variability and
genetic heterogeneity. On the basis of a
review of the literature and their own experiences, Temtamy and McKusick (1969)
have presented a useful classification of
syndactyly types:

I'ype I Syndactyly: Zygodactyly. Webbing between the third and fourth fingers
(complete or partial) with occasional involvement of other fingers. Webbing between the second and third toes (complete ©
or partial). The hands and/or feet may be
affected. In members of some families, only
the feet are affected.

Type II Syndactyly: Synpolydactyly.
Webbing between the third and fourth
fingers associated with the presence of all
components or part of an extra finger in
the web. Webbing of the fourth and fifth
toes associated with the presence of all components or part of an extra toe in the web.
The hands and/or feet may be affected.

Type LI Syndactyly: Fourth and Fifth
Finger Syndactyly. Webbing between the
fourth and fifth fingers. The fifth finger in
the web may be short with rudimentary or
absent phalanges. The feet are not affected.

335
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

336 | Woolf and Woolf

Type IV Syndactyly: Haas Type. Complete webbing of the fingers with six metacarpals and six digits, associated with
flexion of the fingers giving the hands a
cup-shape form.

Type V Syndactyly: Syndactyly with
Metacarpal and Metatarsal Fusion. Webbing of the third and fourth fingers, second
and third toes, associated with metacarpal
and metatarsal fusion.

Although genetic heterogeneity is likely
present, all of the above types of syndactyly
have shown dominant autosomal inheritance in families reported in the literature.
Pedigrees have also been presented (McClintock), 1935; Goodman, 1965) demonstrating that a dominant gene may give
various expressions of syndactyly in association with preaxial and/or postaxial polydactyly. This condition is classified by
Temtamy and McKusick (1969) as a type
of polydactyly and referred to as polysyndactyly. Syndactyly is also an integral
part of many different syndromes such as
anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia, LaurenceMoon-Bardet—Bied] syndrome,
syndrome, oculodentodigital dysplasia, and
acrocephalosyndactyly (such as Apert’s
syndrome). Syndactyly may also occur in
association with certain types of brachydactyly and other dactyly malformations
where there is an absence deformity, such as
split hand/split foot (Temtamy and McKusick, 1969).

MATERIAL AND METHODS

Upon receiving the names of the propositi from hospital surgical records, current addresses were obtained from telephone
books, city directories or church records.
Cases were omitted from the study if current addresses were not available or if
family members were no longer residing in
the state of Utah. The homes were visited
by field workers who obtained information
of epidemiologic interest. Information on

Poland

Social Biology

the presence or absence of a congenital
malformation was obtained for at least the
following relatives of the propositi: sibs,
children, parents, grandparents, aunts,
uncles and first cousins. When it was
learned that more distant relatives had a
dactyly anomaly, the pedigrees were extended to include them. When a positive
family history was encountered, an attempt
was made to obtain a reliable description of
the anomalies present in the affected family
members. This was done by utilizing medical records (surgical, X-ray) when available, or by obtaining a description of the
anomaly from close relatives. For deceased
members of older generations, the descriptions were often cursory, and sometimes
conflicting. Family histories were obtained
for 64 propositi. These propositi were unselected as to type of syndactyly; the only
criterion was that the name of each had
appeared on a hospital surgical record with
the diagnosis of syndactyly. Based upon
X-ray and medical records as well as the
family history, an attempt was made to
classify each propositus as to type of syndactyly. Forty-one had syndactyly with or
without polydactyly. Twenty-three had
syndactyly associated with other anomalies.

RESULTS

SYNDACTYLY WITH OR WITHOUT ASSOCIATED
POLYDACTYLY

The 41 propositi with or without associated polydactyly were classified into four
groups: (1) Type I syndactyly, (2) Type
II syndactyly, (3) Type III syndactyly,
and (4) syndactyly associated with polydactyly other than what is found in cases
of synpolydactyly (Type II syndactyly).
No propositus was encountered that could
be classified as having Type IV or Type V
syndactyly.

Type I Syndactyly: Twenty-three
(56.1%) of the 41 propositi were classified
as having Type I syndactyly. Thirteen

 
Vol. 20, No. 3

(56.5%) of the 23 propositi had a family
history of this disorder. Autosomal dominant inheritance is indicated in these 13
kindreds. Representative pedigrees are presented in Figures 1 and 2. Genetic heterogeneity is undoubtedly present for Type I
syndactyly. In 2 of the 13 kindreds, the
webbing in affected members is restricted to

KiNORED
33
OH BO FO
x 2-3
z3123 TIES = x3
TYPE T

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Genetic Study

of Syndactyly

 

337

the second and third toes. Similar types of.
pedigrees appear in the literature (Gates,
1946), including the Schofield pedigree
which at one time was used as an example
of holandric inheritance (Stern, 1957). The
number of affected individuals in some of
these kindreds is small, and therefore only
a limited sample exists of gene expressions.

t

xa 2-3
s3la3 Be sala3 sates

KINDRED 2

  

a3 2-3 a3 2-3 2-5 Pa}
a

TYPE I

Fic. 1——Two Pedigrees of Type Ia syndactyly in Kindred 1 and Kindred 2 where webbing is restricted
to the second and third toes, The propositus in each family is designated by an arrow. In these pedigrees as well as in those to follow, the symbols are interpreted as follows:

2-3 2-3
3-4
2-3
3-4 3-4
4.5

Bilateral webbing between the second and third toes.

Webbing between the third -and' fourth fingers of
the right hand; webbing between the second and
third toes of. the left foot.

Bilateral webbing between the third and fourth
fingers; webbing between the fourth and fifth toes
of the left foot.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

338 Woolf and Woolf

Social Biology

KINDRED 7?

 

TYPE f

—trs

a

Fic. 2.—Pedigrees of Type Ib syndactyly in Kindred 7 and Kindred 12 where the webbing may
involve the third and fourth fingers and/or the second and third toes. In some cases other digits may

be involved.

However, it is apparent that a dominant
autosomal gene is segregating in some families that causes webbing between the

’ second and third toes with no involvement

of the hands. This type of syndactyly will
be referred to here as Type Ia syndactyly.
A different allele, or more likely, a mutation at a different autosomal locus, would
therefore account for the type of syndactyly
which involves the third and fourth fingers
and/or second and third toes (referred to
here as Type Id syndactyly). Eleven of the
13 kindreds exhibited Type Ib syndactyly.
Representative pedigrees are presented in

Figure 2. In all affected members of these
kindreds the webbing involves either the
third and fourth fingers and/or the second
and third toes with the exception of the
propositus in Kindred 13. In this individual,
webbing involved digits 2 and 3, 3 and 4,
and 4 and 5 of each hand. The mother of
this propositus, who was the sole affected
relative, had bilateral webbing between the
third and fourth fingers. /
Type II Syndactyly: Ten (24.4%) of the
41 propositi were classified as having Type
II syndactyly. All are characterized by some
expression of synpolydactyly involving webVol. 20, No. 3

bing of the third and fourth fingers and/or
fourth and fifth toes. Five (50%) of the 10
propositi had a family history of synpolydactyly. Autosomal dominant inheritance
is present in these five kindreds. Representative pedigrees are shown in Figure 3.
Three of the 5 propositi with a positive

Genetic Study

 

of Syndactyly 339°

family history have a common ancestor.

Each was ascertained independently from
a different source of records. The immediate
family names are dissimilar. The common
ancestor was discovered only after the pedigrees of each was expanded by the field
workers to include other affected indi
KINDRED 21

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

TYPE ¥Y

34
a 5 Bi
7 7 2 2) © 670
O 3-4) L.
a
TYPE

Fic. 3.—Pedigrees of Type II syndactyly in Kindred 21 and Kindred 23. Affected individuals have
some expression of synpolydactyly which includes webbing of the third and fourth fingers and/or
fourth and fifth toes, with the presence of all components or part of an extra digit zm the webb.

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

340 Woolf and Woolf

viduals. The kindred to which each belongs
was described in the literature in 1947 by
Alvord. The progenitor of this kindred,
who had webbing between the third and
fourth fingers of the right hand was a
polygamist with 2 wives and 14 children.

Type III Syndactyly: Four (9.8%) of
the 41 propositi were classified as having
Type III syndactyly based on the criterion
of webbing between the fourth and fifth
fingers. One of these propositi also had
slight webbing between fingers two and
three and shortness of the index and little
finger. X-rays were not available for this
propositus. Another propositus had a rudi
KINORED 18

PAP

~

2-3 pias PI aao3 ao Pie-3 PI
a”

TYPE I AND
“ PREAXIAL POLYDACTYLY

Social Biology

all 4 of the propositi classified as having
this type of syndactyly in this study were
sporadic cases. A familial occurrence likely
would have been encountered with a larger
number of index cases.

SYNDACTYLY ASSOCIATED WITH POLYDACTYLY
(OTHER THAN SYNPOLYDACTYLY )

Four (9.8%) of the 41 propositi had
expressions of syndactyly and polydactyly
other than what is found in cases of synpolydactyly (Type II syndactyly). Two
of these propositi had a family history of
the same condition. Pedigrees of these two
families are shown in Figure 4 (Kindred 18

KINDRED '9

P51P5 PS) PS
a5} P5 , 4-5

POLYSYNDACTYLY

Fic. 4.—Pedigrees of polydactyly-syndactyly in Kindred 18 and Kindred 19 where the anomalies
found in the propositus are also present in at least one close relative. The symbols are interpreted as
follows:

Bilateral webbing between the second and third

2-3 Pl 2-3 Pl toes; bilateral preaxial polydactyly (double big
toes).

PS Webbing between the fourth and fifth toes of the

4-5 left foot; postaxial polydactyly (extra fifth digit)

of the right hand.

mentary. middle phalanx of the fifth digit.
The other two propositi had bilateral complete webbing of digits 4 and 5, but there
was.no apparent abnormality of any of the
phalanges. Although Type III syndactyly
shows a dominant mode of inheritance in
some families (Johnston and Kirby, 1955),

and 19). The propositus in Kindred 18 had
partial webbing of the second and third
toes of both feet and bilateral preaxial polydactyly of the feet. The X-ray report stated
there was virtually complete reduplication
of the first digit with the base half of each

first metatarsal being bifid in nature. A

 
Vol. 20, No. 3 Genetic Study
similar condition was present in one sib;

another sib and father lacked polydactyly

but had complete bilateral webbing between

the second and third toes.

The propositus of the family represented
in Kindred 19 was born with webbing between the fourth and fifth toes of the left
foot associated with an extra fifth digit in

this foot. Postaxial polydactyly Type B

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

(pedunculated postminimus) was also
present in the right hand. Postaxial polydactyly was present in two sibs; one of these
sibs had, in addition, a similar type of
syndactyly of the right foot.

SYNDACTYLY ASSOCIATED WITH OTHER
ANOMALIES
Family histories were also obtained for
23 propositi with syndactyly associated
with brachydactyly, macrodactyly, a deficiency syndrome, or other anomalies. Extreme variation existed among the propositi
for those malformations. Most of these
were unilateral for the anomaly. One propositus had acrocephalosyndactyly (Apert’s
syndrome). Three others had the features
of Poland syndrome including unilateral
aplasia of the pectoralis major muscle. The
family histories of all 23 propositi were
negative for any dactyly malformation. _

DISCUSSION

The types of syndactyly present in the
64 propositi used in this study do not
represent the frequencies of types present
at birth. There is a bias towards types that
are treated surgically. Individuals with
Type Ia syndactyly rarely have surgical
treatment of the webbing. No data have
been published on the incidence of the
various types of syndactyly in any population. It seems likely, however, that Type Ia
syndactyly is the most frequent type. This
is borne out by a study of the nursery
records on file in the Latter-day Saints
Hospital in Salt Lake City, Utah. These

 

of Syndactyly 341
records have been used to obtain incidence
values for various congenital malformations
for the years 1951-61 (Woolf and Turner,
1969).

When a newly born infant is admitted to
the nursery of this hospital specific information is logged in record book: surname,
date of birth and sex. Any malformation or
disorder noted by the attending physicians
at the time of birth, or during the sojourn
of the infant in the nursery, is made part of
the record. The great majority of patients
who enter this hospital are Caucasian.
Hence, the nursery records reflect incidence
values among live births for Caucasians
living in or near Salt Lake City, Utah. The
nursery records contain reliable information
for obvious congenital malformations; however, by their nature, they are not as complete as medical records. During the years
1951-61, 59,561 live births occurred in
this hospital, representing 23% of the total
live births in the state for this period.
Syndactyly with or without an associated
malformation was noted in 18 of these infants giving an incidence of 0.30 per 1,000.
This, of course, is a minimum value since
cases were undoubtedly overlooked. Fourteen had syndactyly alone (0.24 per 1,000).
The descriptions in the nursery records are
cursory and cannot be used to estimate the
incidence of the various different types of
syndactyly. However, Type Ia syndactyly
was present in at least 9 of the 18 cases
indicating that it is the most frequent type
of syndactyly.

The results of this study demonstrate
that a sizeable proportion of the propositi
from Utah with Type I and Type II .
syndactyly carry an autosomal dominant
gene for those anomalies. Thirteen (56.5%)
of the 23 propositi classified as having Type
I syndactyly had a family history of this
disorder compatible with dominant inheritance. Five (50%) of the 10 propositi with
Type II syndactyly had a family history of

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

342

synpolydactyly also compatible with this
mode of inheritance. The sporadic cases
may be mutant individuals where the egg
or sperm giving rise to them contained a

dominant mutant gene; it is also likely that.

some may be explained by recessive genes,
polygenes, or unknown exogenous factors
acting during development. The pedigrees
shown in Figures 1~3 testify that the
dominant genes giving rise to Type I and
Type II syndactyly show reduced penetrance and variable expressivity. An individual with the mutant gene may or may
not show syndactyly. If it does manifest
itself, webbing may involve toes and/or
fingers and may be unilateral or bilateral.
Typical expressions of Type I and Type II
syndactyly are given in Figures 5, 6, and 7.

Woolf and Woolf

Social Biology

and fourth or fourth and fifth fingers,
broad thumb, preaxial and/or postaxial
polydactyly of the feet, webbing of 2 or
more digits of the feet. In the affected
members of these families polydactyly was
present with or without associated syndactyly; syndactyly did not occur by itself.
Further samplings of gene expression are
needed, however, to determine if any deviation occurs in this mode of expression.
Two of the four propositi with associated
polydactyly (other than the synpolydactyly
cases) had the features of polysyndactyly.
Expressions of this syndrome also appeared
in the sibs of one of these propositi. The
parents of this sibship (see Kindred 19,
Figure 4) and all other relatives are normal;
however, a possible parentage problem

    

a

Fic. 5.—The le
fourth fingers (Type I Syndactyly).

Pedigrees of polysyndactyly have been
reported in the literature (McClintock,
1935; Goodman, 1965) with family members showing one or more of the following
anomalies: postaxial polydactyly (Type B)
of the hands, webbing between the third

ft hand of the propositus in Kindred

    

ot FA,”
te Pfoteene Ld = 2te bie ebro hice 6 3,

7 showing webbing between the third and

exists. A suspected biological father of at
least three of the children has bilateral
webbing of the third and fourth fingers,
as well as reported webbing of the third and
fourth toes. He has a sister, a niece, and a
daughter with one or more features of poly
343

LE ESTILO DE REL
te he “ny

Ge,

Eee

Nyt

Ss soy

é pS
6 PGs
PAE

SEES

ESSERE

Genetic Study of Syndactyly

ae

wg 4

dn

 

we i 5 )- ; 4, ta - a,

SL witht tb Sera Tite hontide, Ob EE pit LINE «hes Crete : hike i 2 : 2 1 ere teas te

Vol. 20, No. 3

STO Foquiaseq] BO Pere] Ie [UeSTYSTIA[ JO AissoatuE] Aq popeopumog

 

II Syndactyly (Synpoly
lateral Type

bi

*

wing

Kindred 21 sho

m

itus

Fic. 6—Hands of the propos

dactyly).

o
BRS
ni
o¥Yuo S
BSE a
o Oo 3
Sa 8 x

oo oO
oD > “Go
me hae So
2 oO a
SOE ot
+ & oO ..
oo Vv,
wu - Fo
oS s
= OB wd bb
aT rt
CO md
= GO on
Dams
@ 2 >
go Yw%Sa
BuZt
MW sid
ad ! Cee
#4 5

Fou J
s 4
ages
Oa 5
Cu o
Owe
uo ow w
4 8 ry
geek
oe So
1 SE S
wo oO °
Sood
om 1 &

S|
oO &
adc y
EY =

Ds
52.2 8
BES
ag °
apo g
OGa wg
fs 2
wm 4 Q

ing between

ilateral complete webb
the second and third toes. Preaxial polydac
sib had b

is the other case because of

the family history of this condition (see

special interest
344. Woolf and Woolf Social Biology

34 08 December 2015

Pees! Wise A
See Be
sas

. Papecees
he

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13

os yt .
SL BRN OUNR Lt taansaalione

 

ed Boag ct

tyly (Synpolydactyly).

tyly without accompanying syndactyly has
an obscure etiology; it may have a polygenic
mode of inheritance (Woolf and Woolf,
1970). It is problematical whether the
dactyly anomalies present in the father and

 

2
3
“k

septs

Byes, 5 Mh

 

7

bn,
Z

Fic. 7—Right hand and feet of the sib of the propositus in Kindred 21 showing Type II Syndac
his three children constitute a new polydactyly-syndactyly syndrome or whether
the condition is Type I syndactyly with the
occurrence of preaxial polydactyly being
fortuitous. This family needs to be followed

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 20, No. 3

Genetic Study of Syndactyly

345

 

Fic. 8.—Bilateral preaxial polydactyly and webbing between the second and third toes in the propositus in Kindred 18. A similar condition is present in a sib.

in future generations; there should also be
a lookout for families with a similar condition.

In the study of polydactyly in Utah the
families of four propositi (2 with preaxial
polydactyly and 2 with postaxial polydactyly) had a family history of syndactyly
involving digits 2 and 3 of the feet. It was
concluded that this type of syndactyly
seems to be genetically independent of
polydactyly in these families. Although this
may be the case in most cases, rare genetic
mechanisms may predispose to foot
anomalies involving preaxial polydactyly
and webbing between digits 2 and 3, as
exemplified by the affected members of
Kindred 18.

The results of the present study coupled
with those from the study of polydactyly
in Utah (Woolf and Woolf, 1970), give data
that are useful for genetic counseling.
Dominant inheritance is well documented
for the majority of cases of Type I and II
syndactyly. Although familial types of Type

III syndactyly were not encountered in this
study, the literature testifies that this type
of syndactyly may show dominant inheritance. The familial nature of polysyndactyly was also noted in one family, with
suspected dominant inheritance. Of importance is the observation that syndactyly
associated with other anomalies, such as
brachydactyly, adactyly, multiple malformations, etc., in general, has a more complex etiology. The family histories for these
types of propositi are usually devoid of
dactyly anomalies. The sporadic occurrence
of Apert’s syndrome and Poland syndactyly
has been well documented. (‘There is evi-.
dence that Apert’s syndrome is dominantly
inherited and sporadic only because it is
semi-lethal.) Exceptions are Type B brachydactyly (symbrachydactyly) which has
associated syndactyly, and some varieties of
absence deformities (split hand/split foot),
which frequently show dominant inheritance
(Temtamy and McKusick, 1969).

When polydactyly is present without

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

346

associated syndactyly, the study of cases in
the Utah population (Woolf and Woolf,
1970) demonstrated that dominant inheritance is often present for polydactyly involving an extra fifth digit or in-cases where
there is a triphalangeal digit in place of
thumb, while duplication of the first digit
very likely has a polygenic or some more
involved mode of inheritance. For all types
showing dominant inheritance, genetic
counseling is complicated by the phenomenon of reduced penetrance. A normal child
of an affected parent may not assume that
he is free of the mutant gene.

SUMMARY

Family histories were obtained for 64
propositi with syndactyly. Forty-one had
syndactyly with or without polydactyly.
Twenty-three had syndactyly associated
with other anomalies. The names of the
propositi were obtained from hospital
records (surgical, X-ray, nursery) in the
state of Utah.

A strong family history of the disorder
was noted for those propositi with or without polydactyly. The family history was

Woolf and Woolf

 

Social Biology

negative for the propositi with associated
anomalies other than polydactyly. Thirteen
of 23 propositi with Type I syndactyly
(zygodactyly) had a family history of this
disorder compatible with dominant inheritance. Five of 10 propositi with Type II
syndactyly (synpolydactyly) had a family
history of this condition also compatible
with this mode of inheritance. Sporadic —
cases may be mutant individuals; it is also
likely that some may be explained by recessive genes, polygenes, or unknown exogenous factors acting during development.
Dominant inheritance was also noted for
polysyndactyly (syndactyly with preaxial
and/or postaxial polydactyly). The dominant genes giving rise to Type I syndactyly, Type II syndactyly, and polysyndactyly show reduced penetrance and
variable expressivity.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We wish to thank Mrs. Eloise W. Ellis and
Mrs. Anna Beth Stucki for their excellent
services as field workers in this study.

This work was supported by U.S. Atomic
Energy Commission Contract AT(11-1)-2013
to Arizona State University.

REFERENCES

Atvorp, R. M. 1947 Zygodactyly and associated
variations in a Utah family. J. Hered. 38:49-53.

Cross, H. E., D. B. Lerserc, and V. A. McKustcx. 1968. Type II syndactyly. Amer. J.
Hum. Genet. 20:368-380.

Gates, R. R. 1946. Human genetics. Macmillan,
New York.

Goopman, R. M. 1965. A family with polysyndactyly and other anomalies. J. Hered. 56:37—
38

JonNsTOoN, O., and V. V. Kirsy. 1955. Syndactyly

of the ring and Jittle finger. Amer. J. Hum. 
Genet. 7:80-82.

McCtumtocr, B. S. 1935. Five generations of
polydactylism., J. Hered. 26:141~144.

Stern, C. 1957. The problem of complete Y
linkage in man. Amer, J. Hum. Genet. 9:147166.

TEMTAMY, S., and V. A. McKusicx. 1969. Synopsis of hand malformations with particular
emphasis on genetic factors. In The First Conference on the Clinical Delineation of Birth
Defects, Part III, Limb Malformations (Birth
Defects: Original Article Series, Vol. 5, No. 3,
p. 125-184). The National Foundation—March
of Dimes, New York.

Wootr, C. M., and J. A. Turner. 1969. Incidence
of congenital malformations among live births
in Salt Lake City, Utah, 1951-1961. Soc. Biol.
16:270-279.

Wootr, C. M., and R. M. Woorr. 1970. A genetic
study of polydactyly in Utah. Amer. J. Hum.
Genet. 22:75-88.

 
