Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

A genetic reform of the civil law computations of
the degrees of relationship in families

Ricardo Cruz-Coke

To cite this article: Ricardo Cruz#Coke (1977) A genetic reform of the civil law
computations of the degrees of relationship in families, Social Biology, 24:2, 93-99, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1977.9988270

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1977.9988270

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:36

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

 

A Genetic Reform of the Civil Law Com- | fa
putations of the Degrees of Relationship in : H }
Families - ta io“

Ricardo Cruz-Coke

Genetic Section
Hospital J. J. Aguirre
University of Chile
Santiago, Chile

ABSTRACT: Geneticists have been able to demonstrate differences in the estimation of degrees of
relationship in families as determined by genetic theory and by civil law computations which are
based on the ancient concept of “blood lines.” Unfortunately, no systematic effort to clarify and
resolve these discrepancies has yet been made. This work suggests a method for estimating the
genetic relationship of individuals according to a given genetic family diagram and describes the
differences between this system and that of civil law in most countries.

Man has long realized the existence of
natural relationships between members of
the nuclear family, the basic unit of society. During ancient times, the nature of
these links was attributed to “blood,” and
the concept of ancestral blood lines was
firmly established at the dawn of civilization. This idea supported the blending
theory of inheritance for thousands of
years until it was disproved by Mendel
and declared null hypothesis by the classical demonstration given by Fisher (1918,
1930). Nevertheless, social and legal concepts about marriage and inheritance continue today to be based on an estimate of
degrees of relationship between family
members derived from the old Roman
concept of “blood lines.”

In studying inbreeding and consanguinity, geneticists have been able to demonstrate differences in the estimation of
degrees of relationship in family as determined by genetic theory (Cavalli-Sforza
and Bodmer, 1971) and by civil law
computations. Unfortunately, no systematic effort to clarify and resolve these dis
crepancies has yet been made. This work
suggests a method for estimating the genetic relationship of individuals according
to a given genetic family diagram and describes the differences between this system
and that of civil law.!

CIVIL LAW COMPUTATIONS BASED ON
ROMAN LAW

Roman law defined two types of
relatives—legal and natural. Legal or
“affinal” relatives were those related by
marriage. Natural or “consanguineous”
relatives were those related by “blood,” as
the term implies, either through a direct
line of descent or descent from a common
ancestor. Lineal consanguinity followed
the straight line of descent, one person
from another. Collateral consanguinity
followed branches off the main line, involving persons not descended from one
another but with a common ancestor.

! The complexity of the problem increases when
the rules of canon law are analyzed. To avoid entangling theological and scientific considerations, I
shall omit discussion of the canon law computation.

93

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

94. Cruz-Coke

Roman lawyers were unable to define
clearly the relationships of relatives within
the same generation, such as sibs, twins,
cousins, and half-sibs. Moreover, some
collateral relatives, such as uncles and
great-uncles, were located incorrectly on
the collateral lines.

The concept of consanguinity and the
Roman legal computation was simply
translated and adopted without change in
England in the seventeenth century (Coke,
1628) as is shown in Figure 1. With some
corrections of gross errors, the Roman system was adapted for use in the civil law of
most nations by the nineteenth century
and was the computation incorporated in
the Napoleonic Code. Laws concerning
marriage and inheritance followed. For
example, in the United States today, there
are some fifty laws proscribing marriages
between different kinds of related individuals (Farrow and Juberg, 1969).

Roughly speaking, the most universally
accepted diagram of the system on which
most civil laws are based today is that
shown in Webster (1966). Figure 2 compares the Roman, civil law, and genetic
systems. The Roman and civil law computation each respect the principle that one
degree equals one generation.

THE GENETIC COMPUTATION

A genetic computation of the degrees of
relationship in families originated in the
work of Fisher (1918) and Wright (1922).
Using the correlation method, both founders of the theory of population genetics
were able to apply Mendelian theory to
estimate the natural relationships between
family members.

Fisher demonstrated that the genotypic
correlation between family members was
solely determined by biological relationships between individuals, being independent of the gene frequencies of the
population. The product-moment correlation coefficient between parents and off
 

Social Biology

spring (rpg) in a random mating population was given by the equation

Yeo = pql2pq = yy,

where p and q stand for the gene frequencies of both alleles. Table 1 shows the
distribution of genetic correlations between family members as given by Fisher
(1918).

Wright (1922) defined two basic
coefficients to correlate family members.
The “coefficient of relationship,” ryy, was
defined as the correlation between genetic
values of two individuals, X and Y. The
“inbreeding coefficient,” f,, was defined as
the correlation between the genetic values
of gametes of both individuals X and Y
that unite to produce the individual Z. As
the correlation coefficient is the ratio of the
covariance to the geometric mean of two
variances, there is a simple mathematical
relationship between ryy andfz (Crow and
Kimura, 1970). Consequently, it is possible to relate family members genetically in
a pedigree to compute f, assuming that a
gene has an equal chance (one-half) of
having come from either parent to the
propositus. In every link between two
generations, the general rule is that the
contribution of each path is (4%)", where x
is the number of individuals between both
relatives through a common ancestor.
Every chain of ” generations contributes
(Ay'*! to f.

The work of Fisher and Wright has
been completed by the contributions of
Haldane and Moshinsky (1939), Cotterman (1940), Malécot (1948), and Haldane
and Jayakar (1962), using probability
theory. They introduced the idea that the
two homologous genes in an individual
can be identical by nature, or identical by
descent. Considering this second possibility, Malécot (1948) defined the “coefficient

Fic. 1.—Degrees of relationship in Sir Edward
Coke, 1628, showing how English civil law
computations were taken from the Roman system.

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

anon Sal beat

MS stex 28
| Martens sb age amen ys aktagepins iipiwa lis Re ve oP ns
tj 2
{Pero ng Lede ‘onaet 3 Ging alin bel, cha atl
Bye epos hittealis. | ‘lrinepti+ fineaiis “he wer TE
Metres Cer | See Pas G Bite tee’
ott rind ten epithe tl O Le Grestomd tuat hanciveyeie lined

a Hand M4 le Sol “nie amat ue sei torn, a _Neteak ef rd SEL, ie mnt fie of oh 8 testis tito | | Gefaor .

 

{ Gradus Parentelwes Confangui iitatis if
promehori aapeigest AAuthonsnofiri. —~ | A
| Bete cones of Pareslace & of Conjin sage 4
So apne oe wan amas Lead Firtbe eLetter tale a perce oon afd

ns inte, & every + HLL as es .
aE alumte oe 1G ty eleretete | CE

fate Fae RECT i LLYEA,(| A
. we Fane fave fo > Trt avis. yn nian é
sAbpatnras IAYTNs © dhe Griténnbiither: of "Ue “Crut eminbyibherte Abuvuneylas mage i
bat ints Comnlpinbey — CRM Goanipllier hme Crankvandrelicr Intonation pia |

On the fithe: | bien n oe
ve lhe hitler rs pute Attaviis Atioia

__ Shaniita magna, Tbe Grmittnindinthrrr- P the tseat Cn ite
biti ~~ tectes Gronduecher| * ORMAIUEDCP, dm Lattin dkér — ~

tence

Sornti ex Tarte Putri ay, fT
pep acenlle part bcFatber Py . i ‘aS
s

  

 

Wekrtbers t fiddle , Alaes
Farin oe Piagrtys cman se Eke mitt rent Ge ridges |
pene ogee wet Father an gstecde iether et ns _ other: ot
} Proaunita magna eee pt
peel enter the vom thathoe} jute Proavus. oof we &- OaT an son
loP ntrigns magnuy.* The Crt rant e Srastemtoet
| Kiiiaieleiatalaiaiiaiaias sl
; x
. Avita magna. a ¢ Avus, | g Avid
ite. hurt enlbeKibergyde Vie Grand fiero frereaed 1rd ® <
3 Patrius. : * ~ Avutreuhies oe
Leb nderrFithersBrotter, Vuter. ] Mater. 4. Pbel nel er. edie fintier
Fhe Amita, Father, ‘Mother Datertera. | ||
ee tuitan Ft Sykes, Fy natin P| Lee eee ‘ Alia q
Paton r= | [ie ecantcendens | e Hmarndianah’ 1
ome les a Tato, lL we Tageee Saattede| . Boe Je se tani 0a

  
  
 
  
    
  
   

g: . %
go Erateraiind é < y ferenmreerte Yetder>
\emsonel é es i satis amin
\ Boebene is : 4 es fe |
\ Serer | ¥ s lain rs)
¢ low]

 
 
 
  

¥ J Pughter ne

 
    

Sieger eeawsonaagasaens kere ee Gi tone ctastentn aco ts traesad

fer eh BBs osteo DOCH KY ARRAY Snare EERE — GanOy

Nepoe iinealis g sepusliicalss
The feed. a Tor treet Niece | |

EP Pea
ae
Ab eee OS fee ™

     
 

  
   

BR ee Cees

    
    
  
 

by pensrenirty

 
     
 
 

r is rere
ees LE lenal ‘4. De braves Pin Bers be
tee Ea lieve at Vier tensa Nephed! ee, peer

  

    

oO ELLE SLE EEE

EASE SS na OE AA ARE AS

95
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

ROMAN CONSANGUINITY

 

Lineal Collateral

Abavus (4)

 

Proavus (3)

Propositus

Filius

Nepos
linealis

Pronepos
linealis

Abnepus
linealis

Overlapping generations

CIVIL LAW

Great
uncle

( ) Uncle

( ) Sib

( ) Child ( ) Nephew

2+Grand child( ) ( )

0

4 2 3 4

Degree of “consanguinity’

( ) Cousin

||P

0

 

GENETIC

S
«
sO
>
&
&
S Great

uncle

a

& ,
ce

O ( )Uncle *

( )Sib ( )Cousin

Chitd©) O\Nephew ()

  

4 2 3 4

Degree of parentage

FIG. 2.—Comparison of the Roman, civil law, and genetic systems of determining degrees of relationship in families.

 

96

30") °Z1I)

ASojorg, [Bog
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Vol. 24, No. 2

Genetic Reform

TABLE 1

GENETIC CORRELATIONS BETWEEN REPRESENTATIVE MEASUREMENTS OF
RELATIVES FOR RANDOM MATING

Ancestral

Generations Line
Own generation ..........0. ce eee 1
Father’s generation .............06. 1/2
Grandfather’s generation ..........- 1/4
Great-grandfather’s generation ...... 1/8

SOURCE Fisher, 1918

of kinship,” fyy, as the probability that a
gene taken at random in the propositus X
and a gene taken at random in the relative
Y will be identical by descent. The inbreeding coefficient f, of an individual is
the same as the coefficient of kinship fry of
his parents. Recently, Jacquard (1970) has
defined “identity coefficients” according to
the identity of pairs of genes in the
gametes.

According to all these concepts of population genetics, it is possible to conclude
that the correlation between relatives
under panmixia is equal to the proportion
of identical genes derived from a common
ancestor and that, in fact, family members
share a pool of genes that are identical by
descent and determine the degree of
relationship between them.

A GENETIC FAMILY DIAGRAM

The construction of a genetic diagram of
the human family to compute degrees of
relationship between a proband and relatives was proposed by Cruz-Coke (1974).
Figure 3 shows a corrected version of that
diagram. It is an autosomal panmictic
model containing all possible types of relatives within five overlapping generations
and extended to the fifth degree of
“collateral” lines. The degrees of relatedness are estimated according to the four
yardsticks described previously; the coefficient of relationship (vyy), the coefficient of inbreeding (jZ), the coefficient of
kinship (fry), and the proportion of genes

97

Half- First Half Second

Brother brother Cousin Cousin Cousin
1/2 1/4 1/8 1/16 1/32
1/4 1/8 1/16 1/32 1/64

1/8 1/16 1/32 1/64 1/128

1/16 1/32 1/64 1/128 1/256

in common (per cent). Arrows show the
flow of identical genes across the
generations (Cotterman, 1940; Li, 1955).
This diagram excluded the correlation between sex-linked genes, because they represented a small fraction (5 per cent) of the
genome, and the nature of the complex
correlations is difficult to show in a twodimensional set. This problem has been
studied by Haldane and Moshinsky (1939)
and Li (1955).

In this genetic diagram, all so-called
“collateral” relatives (sibs, uncles, cousins,
nephews) appeared one degree nearer to
the proband than when computed with the
Roman and civil law computation. This
general and wide difference is shown in
Figure 2.

DISCUSSION

Laws governing marriage between
related individuals and inheritance were
written before the development of genetic
theory during this century and were based
on inheritance through “blood lines.”
Today genetically sound degrees of relationship between family members can be
shown following the laws of population
genetics, and there is a wide discrepancy
between the computations made by civil
law and those made through modern genetic knowledge. The time has come when
this anachronistic situation should be
changed.

It seems reasonable that lawyers, social
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

GENERATIONS
AND
CoEFFICIENTS

 

DEGREES OF RELATIONSHIP

Great-greatgrandparent

a,

Greatgranduncle

Half
first cousin

Second nephew
Half
Grandnephew grandnephew
Great- Greatgrandchild grandnephew
Great-greatgrandchild

1/16

Fic. 3.—Genetic diagram of the human family (after Cruz-Coke, 1974).

 

Great-greatgranduncle

Half greatgranduncle

Second
great-uncle

Second cousin

Half

Second
grandnephew

Half greatgrandnephew

4  Great-greatgrandnephew

1/32

3.125%

 

86

9y7OH-znay)

ASojOlg [BIDOS
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Vol. 24, No. 2 Genetic
scientists, and geneticists could reach an
agreement in defining a unified system
through which the accurate degrees of
relationship of individuals in a family
could be computed. Such a system would
of course have important consequences in
changing present laws about prohibited
marriages, inheritance of property, and

Reform 99

even royal succession. However, it would
be a vast step forward, in that these laws
would have a rational scientific basis
rather than being based on archaic concepts. We might do well to recall the
master precept of Sir Edward Coke three
centuries ago: ‘“‘Reason is the life of the
law.”

REFERENCES

CAVALLI-SForzA, L. L., and W. F. BODMER. 1971.
The genetics of human populations. Freeman, San
Francisco.

COTTERMAN, C. W. 1940. A calculus for statisticogenetics. Ph.D. thesis. Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.

COKE, SIR EDWARD. 1628. The first part of the
Institutes of the Laws of England, or a commentary upon Littleton. 15th ed., 1794. Brooke, London.

Crow, J. F., and M. Kimura. 1970. An introduction to population genetics theory. Harper and
Row, New York.

Cruz-CoKE, R. 1974. A genetic diagram of the
human family. Lancet 2:109.

FARROW, M. G., and R. C. JUBERG. 1969. Genetics
and laws prohibiting marriage in the United
States. J. Amer. Med. Assoc. 209:534—539.

FisHeR, R. A. 1918. The correlation between relatives on the supposition of Mendelian inheritance.
Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh 52:399-433.

. 1930. The genetical theory of natural selection. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

HALDANE, J. B. S., and S. D. JAYAKAR. 1962. An
enumeration of some human relationships. J.
Genet. 58:81-107.

HALDANE, J. B. S., and P. MosHINsKyY. 1939. Inbreeding in Mendelian populations with special
reference to human cousin marriage. Ann. Eugen.
9:321-340.

JACQUARD, A. 1970. Structure genetique des populations. Masson, Paris.

Li, C. C. 1955. Population genetics. Univ. of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Ma.LtcoT, G. 1948. Les
Vhérédité. Masson, Paris.
WEBSTER, N. 1966. Third new international dictionary of the English language unabridged. /n

Encyclopaedia Britannica. Chicago.

WRIGHT, S. 1922. Coefficients of inbreeding and
relationships. Amer. Natural. 56:330-338.

 

mathématiques de
