Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

Trends in the intensity and direction of natural
selection

Bruce K. Eckland

To cite this article: Bruce K. Eckland (1972) Trends in the intensity and direction of natural
selection, Social Biology, 19:3, 215-223, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987988

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987988

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 3

»
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 1 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:33

 
Trends in the Intensity and Direction

of Natural Selection

Bruce K. Eckland

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Department of Sociology
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

Several of the speakers at this symposium
have noted that the biological evolution of
man has zof run its course, as many of us
once were taught, but rather the genetic
structure of contemporary societies is
undergoing continual change as a result of
both biological and social processes. To
this, I would like to add the point that it
is not always even clear which of these two
modes of change, i.e., the biological or the
social, is the more conservative force, although we usually assume it is the former.

In regard to the broad interdependencies
between man and his physical environment,
heredity zs probably a far more conservative or restraining factor than culture. To
be sure, biological evolution has not
stopped, but it is exceedingly slow. Each
new generation, as a whole, is largely a
direct photocopy of its predecessor. In
contrast, social change has been accelerating in an almost geometric ratio due to
man’s expanding technological capacities
which, in turn, have almost completely reversed the order of dependency between
man and his environment. The stability of
whole ecosystems today appears to be more
dependent upon what man will do to alter
these systems than the other way around.
In any case, certainly for the immediate

 

 

future, man’s survival on this planet depends more upon how he uses his institutions and his technology than upon either
natural or artificial selection.

On the other hand, it is easy to overlook
the fact that in certain respects culture
may be a more conservative force than
heredity. An example is intergenerational
social mobility. Owing to the cultural fact
that children are not raised in communes
by surrogates but more typically in families
by their biological parents, there is a very
strong tendency for social advantage in a
class society to be transferred from parent
to child, thus inhibiting the movement of
individuals through the class structure. In
contrast, owing to the genetic fact that the
average qualitative values of the offspring
tend to “regress” toward the population
mean of the parental generation (i.e., children do not always resemble their parents),
societies concerned with equal opportunity
and the efficient utilization of human resources are forced to devise “artificial’’
means, such as schools and colleges, for redistributing individuals in the status system.

Although these patterns are not likely to
be reversed very soon, it is quite probable
that in the not too distant future man will

215

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

216 Eckland

take fuller control over his own biological
as well as his cultural evolution either
through conservative eugenics programs,
like the development of sperm banks, or
through direct genetic engineering, such as
cloning. But, before man sets upon such a
course, which may be irreversible once
undertaken, he ought to know more about
the plasticity of his present organism, and
he ought to know the intensity of natural
selection and the direction in which current
population trends are taking him.

In this report, I shall review what we
presently know about the genetic effects of
family size and differential fertility, parental age and generation time, child spacing,
mortality, inbreeding, and assortative mating. I have made no effort to be exhaustive.
What follows is a summary of the major
findings and an attempt to evaluate the net
effect of current population trends on the
intensity and direction of natural selection.

FAMILY SIZE AND DIFFERENTIAL
FERTILITY

In any genetically heterogeneous population, changes in family size and differential
fertility may have important genetic consequences. Available data indicate a close
association between modernization and
family size, with lower parities in the final
stages of the so-called “demographic transition”—that point at which, following a
period of high fertility and declining mortality, fertility rates begin to decline. One
effect of decreasing family size has been a
significant decrease in consanguineous marriages and in the level of inbreeding. Quite
simply, in large breeding populations the
probabilities of cross-cousin or similar consanguineous marriages are substantially
lower if individuals have only six or ten
close relatives rather than sixty or a hundred from which to choose a mate. Lower
levels of inbreeding should be expected to

 

Social Biology

lower the incidence of deleterious traits—a
point to which we will return later.

Perhaps more importantly, reducing
family size affects differential fertility and
the opportunity for selection. Genetic selection depends, after all, upon differences in
completed family size or, more precisely,
the variance about the mean. As a general
rule, this variance rises as birth rates fall,
thus increasing the opportunity for selection. Typically, when birth rates initially
begin to drop, such as when contraceptive
devices are first introduced, not all individuals respond in the same way. Some persons continue to reproduce at previously
established levels, while others limit the
size of their families.

Eventually, however, the variance itseif
begins to decline, as apparently it is in the
United States, and the opportunity for
genetic selection also declines (Kirk,
1968). Nevertheless, the “index of opportunity for selection” due to fertility is still
higher at the present time in most industrialized national populations where birth
rates are moderately low, including in the
United States, than in tribal populations or
“isolates” where birth rates have remained
high (Spuhler, 1962; Crow, 1966; Osborn,
1968).

Of course, whether selection actually is
taking place or not depends upon the particular genotypes under consideration and
the extent to which they correlate with
family size or other selection pressures.
Polymorphic traits in man (those with
higher rates of incidence than the rates of
mutation normally would predict and
therefore presumed to be under some form
of selective pressure) have not been studied
very often in terms of their reproductive
performance. This is somewhat surprising
since fertility is one of the main components in the adaptive “fitness” of individuals from an evolutionary perspective.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 3

While it is possible to predict the rate of
change in gene frequencies as a function of
differential fertility, the procedure is complicated and requires data which usually
are extremely difficult to obtain. Nevertheless, the evidence is reasonably clear in regard to some multifactorial traits with high
heritabilities, like intelligence.

The contribution of intelligence in the
evolution and cultural development of man,
both past and present, has received perhaps
an inordinate amount of attention. Without
belaboring the point, it is quite probable
that differential fertility continues to favor
positive selection for genetic intelligence,
even when in recent generations it may
have appeared otherwise. Based on samples
of children, about thirty years ago some
“experts” concluded that, since family size
and measured intelligence were inversely
correlated, the average intelligence of the
population was gradually declining. A subject of considerable debate, the hypothesis
has now been discarded, basically for three
reasons: (1) the earlier work, based on
cross-sectional data and only reproductive
individuals, had serious methodological
shortcomings (Duncan, 1952); (2) the
direct evidence, from longitudinal studies,
actually has shown a slight rise over time
in test scores for both large and small
families (e.g., Scottish Council, 1949); and
(3) the four most recent studies in the past
decade in the United States on the relationship between fertility and intelligence
all have found a slight positive correlation
(Waller, 1971; Higgins, Reed and Reed,
1962; Bajema, 1963 and 1971).

Yet, even if we should find a slight negative correlation between measured intelligence and fertility, we still could not
conclude that the genetic structure for
intelligence in the population as a whole
was deteriorating. In order to arrive at
such a conclusion, an unusually high in
Natural Selection

 

217

verse correlation between fertility and
measured intelligence would have to be
observed since the genes and environmental
conditions producing intelligence tend to
covary. This statement rests upon the following two assumptions. (1) In an absolute sense, one generally has more innate
ability than an intelligence test usually
measures, meaning that, except for random
errors in measurement, you can’t beat an
IQ test. A high score might cause you to
overestimate your ability but only relative
to others. (2) Owing to gene-environment
covariance, the degree to which IQ tests
underestimate the true genotypic scores is
inversely related to the size of the score,
meaning that the environmental determinants of IQ are distributed in such a
manner as to depress the scores of dull children more so than the scores of bright
children, Given these conditions, it follows
that, even under comparatively high assortative mating for intelligence, relative to
the observed population mean, the offspring
of low IQ parents probably are quite a bit
brighter than their test scores indicate. In
order for the true population mean to move
downward from one generation to the next,
low IQ parents would have to reproduce at
a rate not just higher than that of high IQ
parents but higher by an amount in excess
of the covariance term which, given our
present state of knowledge and methodologies, I believe is an amount of indeterminate size.

To put the point another way, the
eugenic question being raised here (which
involves slow and uncertain effects) perhaps is much less relevant. at the present
time than the more effective use by contemporary societies of existing resources.
We probably are far from doing all we can
in using the genotypic intelligence we already possess, especially among the disadvantaged.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

218 Eckland

PARENTAL AGE AND GENERATION TIME

The age of parents at the birth of their
children, an aspect of differential fertility,
has both direct and indirect effects on the
genetic structure of human populations.
Indirectly, parental age affects birth rates;
the sooner women begin to have children
the more time they theoretically have to
have them in abundance. In addition, parental age affects the age composition and
mean generation time of the population
and, thus, its mating structure and the rate
of evolutionary change.

The point at which women bear children
during their reproductive period also has
important genetic consequences in more
direct ways through its effects on maternal
mortality, the frequency of new mutations,
the incidence of chromosomal abnormalities, and selection pressures against lateonset multifactorial diseases. Generally,
the optimal time for childbearing appears
to be in the 20-30 age range, with increasing frequencies of new mutations and
chromosomal abnormalities among older
parents and more environmental insults
(the genetic basis for which is less well
established) among younger parents (Graham et al., 1972). Some of these selection
pressures no doubt are beneficial, while
others probably are deleterious.

For example, in Japan over the past
generation, reductions in the variance of
maternal age apparently help account for
the marked decrease in Down’s syndrome
and other congenital malformations observed during this same period (Lerner,
1968). On the other hand, decreasing parental age favors selection for polygenic
diseases where the onset of the disease is
not apparent until the reproductive period.
An example is schizophrenia. Extrapolating
from the decline in age-specific birth rates
in the general population and the declining
age of first admissions of schizophrenics to

Secial Biology

an institution, it has been suggested that
the selection pressures against schizophrenia may have declined substantially in
the past generation in the United States
(Bodmer, 1968). This, of course, assumes
the importance of genetic inheritance in the
onset of schizophrenia—a term used for the
diagnosis of what probably are a considerably diverse group of diseases and malfunctions. Moreover, the available evidence
(from England and Wales) indicates that
psychiatric patients, including schizophrenics, have low rates of marriage, high rates
of divorce, and low rates of fertility within
marriage (Slater, Hare, and Price, 1971).

Most industrial countries, including the
United States, presently are experiencing
slight decreases in maternal age and the
length of generation, and marked decreases
in the variances of both indices. These
trends are associated with the movement
toward earlier marriages and smaller family
size, With the exception of late-onset
diseases, their genetic consequences seem
generally beneficial.

CHILD SPACING

Although some studies have shown relationships between longer birth intervals
and lower prenatal and infant mortality
rates, child spacing apparently has little, if
any, direct effect on hereditary defects that
are not already accounted for by parental
age and mean generation time. The only

. genetic consequences of any significance

are indirect effects on the intensity of selection through mortality and fertility, as
previously mentioned. Family size depends,
to some degree, upon child spacing, although this relationship apparently only
holds for successful planners. Also, there is
a moderate correlation between birth delays in the first and subsequent intervals
between children for the same parents
(Westoff et al., 1961), which suggests that
whatever the effects of child spacing are,

 
   
 
 
  
  
   
  
  
     
  
 
 
   
 
  
   
  
 
   
   
 
  
 
  
  
   
   
    
   
  
 
   
 
   
  

Vol. 19, No. 3

they tend to be cumulative over the reproductive period.

MORTALITY

Due to high rates and large betweenfamily variances, mortality at one time
must have had a strong influence on selection in all underdeveloped countries. In
the United States, for example, just prior
to the industrial revolution, about two out
of every five persons born in 1840 did not
survive to age 15 (Jacobson, 1964). Before
the onset of the demographic transition,
mortality undoubtedly was as important as
differential fertility in the genetic restructuring of human populations. However, declining death rates, especially infant
mortality, may have weakened the opportunity for selection against some deleterious genes. In mature industrial societies
today, almost no one dies before reaching
the reproductive period and most (at least
among the women) survive well beyond its
normal termination.

On the other hand, fetal wastage is still
very high, and probably has not changed
significantly in recent generations. However, this is only speculative since we are
just beginning to design reliable procedures
for examining the incidence of fetal loss,
particularly spontaneous abortions during
early pregnancy.

In regard to the polygenic inheritance of
intelligence, differential mortality apparently continues to favor the selection of
genes for higher mental abilities. Slightly
higher mortality rates are found for the
children of mentally retarded parents
(Reed, 1971). There also is some evidence
that severe malnutrition favors the survival
of the more intelligent members of those
populations where hunger is still a problem.
On the other hand, “relaxed selection”
has important long-range effects on the incidence of deleterious recessives and certain
disease-resistant genes. As various bacterial

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Natural Selection

 

219

diseases, such as smallpox and cholera,
have been all but eradicated in most populations of the world, genes for resistance to
these diseases (to the extent that they did
exist) no longer have a selection advantage
and, as a result, presumably have decreasing frequencies. So long as these infectious
and epidemic diseases do not reappear,
there probably is no need to be concerned.

However, relaxed selection may also increase the incidence of deleterious recessive
genes. In preindustrial societies, mutant
genes were eliminated at about the same
rate at which they occurred. As medical
advances have improved our ability to
modify the deleterious effects of weak
genes that otherwise would have led to
sterility or death, such genes could be increasing in frequency. Few geneticists seem
to believe that the genetic burden of relaxed selection is a cause for immediate
alarm. There is more disagreement concerning the long-range effects. Some believe
they could be quite severe, causing us
either to give far more attention than we
have so far to genetic counseling or else to
spend our energies repairing one another’s
genetic deficiencies (Crow, 1966).

INBREEDING

The genetic consequences of inbreeding
are largely, although possibly not entirely,
deleterious. The more closely mating partners are related to one another by descent,
the greater the possibility of uncovering
deleterious recessive alleles and of rendering certain genes homozygous which, in
turn increases the incidence of recessive
diseases, fetal loss, and the risk for mental
retardation (Lerner, 1968; Vandenberg,
1971; and Thiessen, 1972). These effects
have been recorded in numerous studies
(Schull and Neel, 1972) and are, of course,
most severe in incestuous matings, such as
between brother and sister or father and
daughter.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

220 Eckland

It is largely for these reasons that the
breakdown in inbred populations or isolates
is believed to be increasing the general
health and vigor of man. “Outbreeding,”
of course, is due to a variety of social and
cultural conditions, including the greater
freedom accorded individuals in their
choice of mates, the greater mobility or
migration of people both within and between contemporary populations, and as
mentioned earlier, a decrease in family size
which reduces the proportion of eligible
relatives among prospective mates.

However, the effects of declining consanguinity and inbreeding may not be entirely beneficial. First, some puzzling
results have been obtained in the United
States, indicating a fairly strong and positive relationship between fetal loss and
outcrossings in Caucasians, as measured by

the number of countries in the background

of parents (Bresler, 1970). What the explanation for this is, we do not know.
Secondly, it is not altogether clear from an
evolutionary standpoint that increasing
heterozygosity and the trend toward a
single world gene pool is beneficial, since
the breakdown of partially isolated breeding populations removes one of the most
important mechanisms (genetic drift) that
has been responsible for human diversity
and evolution.

ASSORTATIVE MATING

Whereas inbreeding involves departures
from perfect panmixia of matings between individuals who are related by
ancestry,’ assortative mating involves
character-specific mate selection for particular genotypes or phenotypes (usually
the latter). Like inbreeding, assortative
mating may operate in such a way as to
increase the incidence of deleterious recessives, although its usual effects are to
increase the average homozygosity of
polygenic traits and thereby increase the

Social Biology

total population variance of these traits.
This may have positive or negative outcomes, or both, depending upon the direction and intensity of selection in mating
patterns. For instance, it has been estimated that assortative mating for intelligence might directly account for about
80% of the frequency of individuals with
IQ’s above 145 (Jensen, 1969); but it also
may account for a substantial proportion
of individuals with IQ’s in the mentally
retarded range.

While assortative mating, by itself, does
not change gene frequencies in the population, it redistributes genes in ways that
may indirectly affect the gene pool; that is,
by increasing genetic parent-child correlations and reducing the within-family variance for certain traits, assortative mating
may amplify the selection pressures of differential fertility (Eckland, 1972). Moreover, depending upon the number of gene
loci involved and the degree of dominance
of each locus, the effects of a high coefficient of assortative mating on the variance
of a trait that is under strong genetic control might be observed within a relatively
small number of generations (Crow and
Felsenstein, 1968; Falek, 1971).

The same general conditions that are
lowering the rates of inbreeding in contemporary populations apparently have led
to an increase in assortative mating, at
least for certain traits. Inbreeding is closely
associated with class, racial, and ethnic
endogamy; assortative mating is associated
with the decline of traditional kinship networks and the development of family
structures where individual rather than
group characteristics are more central to
the question of who mates with whom
(Eckland, 1968).

Assortative mating probably has been
decreasing for some morphological and
behavioral characteristics while increasing
for others, among which intelligence perDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 3 Natural
haps is the best example. While it may be
true that “like attracts like,” assortative
mating for intelligence is a built-in feature
of modern educational systems since how
much of what kind of education people
receive has become increasingly dependent
upon intelligence; and educational background, in turn, largely limits one’s range
of eligible partners (Eckland, 1970).

THE NET GENETIC EFFECTS

While it is not possible to assess the
exact nature of the genetic consequences
of the population processes just reviewed,
a summary of these processes and current
trends may help us to reach certain general
conclusions.

First, in regard to the intensity for selection, changes in birth and death rates
during the demographic transition apparently have had counterbalancing effects.
Variances in fertility rose, despite declining
family size, while both the variance and
rate of mortality declined. The results have
largely offset one another, and thus the
total index of opportunity for selection in
both developing and modern societies appears to have remained fairly stable. However, variances in fertility over the last
generation or two in the United States
appear to have declined, thus reducing the
overall opportunity for selection. The
trend, of course, could be only temporary.

Lower rates of inbreeding and higher
rates of assortative mating for some traits,
moreover, are complicating the picture.
Outbreeding probably reduces the intensity
for selection, but assortative mating may
raise it. In addition, shorter generation
time due to earlier parental age would
slightly accelerate the effects of any of
these trends.

In regard to the direction of selection
pressures, the genetic consequences depend
upon whether we are speaking about survival or reproduction processes and also

Selection

221

upon whether we are thinking in short- or
long-range terms. Family planning parameters, such as lower birth rates and lower
mean parental age, appear mainly to have
eugenic effects. (The one significant exception is the possible increase of late-onset
diseases due to earlier parental age.) The
general effects of lowered rates of inbreeding also appear to be beneficial, at least in
the short run. On the other hand, reduced
rates of mortality up through the reproductive period may have relaxed the selection
pressures against deleterious genes, quite
probably with more serious implications in
the long run.

At this point in time, it is not possible to
weigh the consequences of each of these
factors and come to any firmer conclusion
about the overall net eugenic or dysgenic
effects of current population trends. In
addition to the question of changes in gene
frequencies within a given population, we
examined some possible trends in the redistribution of genes within human populations as a result of less inbreeding and new
assortative mating patterns. Here, we have
even less evidence of either the intensity or
direction of selection pressures. Yet, some
of the hypothesized trends are compelling
and certainly warrant more attention.

CONCLUSIONS

Man’s control over his reproductive
habits, whether self or externally controlled, no doubt will continue to dominate
most discussions of natural selection for
some time in the future, and rightly so.
Relative to the kinds of factors that produce differentials in mortality and influence
other evolutionary mechanisms, factors
producing changes in birth rates are both
unstable and largely unpredictable. It behooves us to learn more about population
processes, since even if we knew the exact
genetic effects of declining fertility, inbreeding, and so forth, we would still be
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

222 Eckland

left with the question of how to control
these processes and how to predict where
they may be taking us if left uncontrolled.

Moreover, as some geneticists themselves have pointed out (eg., Graham,
1971), the activities in which geneticists
presently are engaged probably have little
impact on and give us little insight into
the population problem. Recent changes in
reproductive patterns do not appear to
depend very much upon the genetic structure of human populations. Rather, they
are largely the result of social change
(including new organizational patterns of
work and leisure which, from the viewpoint
of the parents, turn adolescent children
into economic liabilities): the breakdown
of the extended family system, and thus
some of the emotional supports for high
fertility; a drastic reduction in the need
for human labor, and consequently in a
society’s willingness to allow population
growth to go unchecked; a new mass system of secondary and higher education
which accelerates our investment in human
capital and the cost of children; increasing
social and geographic mobility which has
radically altered the traditional boundaries
of mate selection; improved communication making possible the rapid transmission
of cultural values and norms, including
those governing fertility; and new methods of contraception which have improved
man’s ability to control his own reproductive habits. These and many other social
factors undoubtedly are still at work in
most contemporary societies. Considering
the number and extremely complex mixture of cultural elements that bear upon
the problem, it is no wonder that most
theoretical models of the population process, including those of most demographers,
appear so incomplete and seem to explain
so little.

In the United States, there are two current issues so relevant to the future of the

Social Biology

population problem that I would be amiss
in not mentioning them. These are the twin
ideals of equality of status and equality of
opportunity. Both could accelerate or at
least maintain the present decline in fertility
rates. Whereas it might be argued that
easing the economic burden of children
among the poor and the near poor could
act as an incentive for having large families,
just the opposite appears to have occurred.
Birth rates in the lower socioeconomic class
are continuing to decline. The answer may
lie in the fact that rising incomes and more
welfare dollars have led to greater economic
security, thus giving the disadvantaged
more optimism and control over their lives,
both of which appear to be prerequisites to
successful family planning.

Increasing equality of opportunity and
social mobility may have similar effects by
raising the aspirations of parents both for
themselves and their children, thus giving
them reason to plan ahead. But, equal opportunity and mobility also disrupt family
life, probably making children intrinsically
less desirable. In this case, children would
become not only economic but emotional
burdens. Nevertheless, the results anticipated should be the same—lower fertility.
In addition, equality of opportunity for
women, if it happens, may lower fertility
rates if familial and extra-familial work
roles for women are basically incompatible,
as indeed it appears they may be.

These trends bear watching more closely.
Moreover, we need to learn far more about
how fertility decisions are made from a
sociocultural perspective—an area of study
which demographers and other behavioral
scientists are just beginning to develop
fruitful models (e.g., Beshers, 1967; Davis,
1965 and 1967; Kasarda, 1971; and
Kupinsky, 1971).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I wish to thank Dudley Kirk, Stanford
University, and Neil H. Kirkman, University
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 19, No. 3

of North Carolina for critical comments on an
earlier draft of this paper which was read at
the symposium on Human Evolution: Past,

Natural Selection

223

Present, and Future at the American Museum
of Natural History, New York, November
18-20, 1971.

REFERENCES

Bayema, C. J. 1963. Estimation of the direction
and intensity of natural selection in relation
to human intelligence by means of the intrinsic
rate of natural increase, Eugen. Quart. 10:175187.

 

. 1971. Natural selection and intelligence:
Relationship between intelligence and completed
fertility among third Harvard Growth Study
participants. Paper presented at the annual
meetings of the American Association of Physical Anthropologists, Boston.

BesHers, J. M. 1967. Population processes in
social systems. The Free Press, New York.

Bopmer, W. F. 1968. Demographic approaches to
the measurement of differential selection in
human populations. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 59:
690-699.

BreEsLer, J. B. 1970. Outcrossings in caucasians
and fetal loss. Soc. Biol. 17:17-25.

Crow, J. 1966. The quality of people: Human
evolutionary changes. Bioscience, 16:863-867.

Crow, J. F., and J. FELSenstern. 1968. The effects
of assortative mating on the genetic composition
of a population. Eugen. Quart. 15:85-97.

Davis, K. 1965. Sociological aspects of genetic
control, p. 173-204. In J. D. Roslansky (ed.),
Genetics and the future of man. AppletonCentury-Crofts, New York.

1967. Population policy: Will current
programs succeed? Science 158:730-739.

Duncan, O. D. 1952. Is the intelligence of the
general population declining? Amer. Sociol. Rev.
17:401-407.

. 1968. Theories of mate selection. Eugen.
Quart. 15:71-84.

Ecxianp, B. K. 1970. New mating boundaries in
educational selection. Soc. Biol. 17:269-277,

, 1972. Evolutionary consequences of differential fertility and assortative mating in man.
In T. Dobzhansky et al. (eds.), Evolutionary
biology, Vol. 5. Appleton-Century-Crofts, New
York.

Farex, A. 1971. Differential fertility and intelligence: Current status of the problem. Soc. Biol.
18 (Suppl.): S50-S59.

GrawaM, J. B. 1971. The relation of genetics to
control of human fertility. Perspec. Biol. Med.
14:615-638.

GRAHAM, J. B., B. H. Cowen, and W. J. ScHULL.
1972, Genetic effects of family planning. Amer.
J. Hum. Genet. 24:350-351.

Hiccins, J., F. W. Reep, and S. C, Reep. 1962.
Intelligence ‘and family size: A paradox resolved. Eugen. Quart. 9:84-90.

 

 

 

Jacozson, P. H. 1964. Cohort survival for generations since 1840. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart.
42:44-45,

Jensen, A. R. 1969. How much can we boost IQ
and scholastic achievement? Harvard Educ.
Rev. 39:1-123.

Kasarpa, J. D. 1971. Economic structure and
fertility: A comparative analysis. Demography
8:307-317.

Kirk, D. 1968. Patterns of survival and reproduction in the U.S.: Implications for selection.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 59:662-670.

Kuprnsky, S. 1971. Non-familial activity and
socio-economic differentials in fertility. Demography 8:353-367.

Lerner, I. M. 1968. Heredity, evolution, and
society. W. H. Freeman and Company, San
Francisco.

OsBorn, F. 1968. The future of human heredity.
Weybright and Ralley, New York.

Reep, E. W. 1971. Mental retardation and
fertility. Soc. Biol. 18 (Suppl.): S42-S44.

SCHULL, W. J., and J. V. NEEL. 1972. The effects
of parental consanguinity and inbreeding in
Hirado, Japan. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 24:425453.

Scottish CouNcm FOR RESEARCH IN EDUCATION.
1949. The trend of Scottish intelligence. Univ.
of London Press, London.

SiaTer, E., E. H. Hare, and J. S. Price. 1971.
Marriage and fertility of psychiatric patients
compared with national data. Soc. Biol. 18
(Suppl.): S60-S73.

SPUHLER, J. N. 1962. Empirical studies on quantitative human genetics, p. 241-252. Proceedings
of the UN/WHO seminar on the use of vital
and health statistics for genetic and radiation
studies. United Nations, New York.

Tatrssen, D. D. 1972. Gene organization and
behavior. Random House, New York.

VANDENBERG, S. G. 1971. What do we know today
about the inheritance of intelligence and how do
we know it?, p. 182-218. In R. Cancro (ed.),
Intelligence: Genetic and environmental influences. Grune and Stratton, New York.

WALLER, J. H. 1971. Differential reproduction:
Its relation to IQ test score, education and occupation. Soc. Biol. 18:122-136.

WesTorFr, C. F., R. G. Potter, P. C. Sac, and
E. G. Misurer. 1961. Family growth in metropolitan America. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton.
