Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Do r/K reproductive strategies apply to human
differences?

J. Philippe Rushton

To cite this article: J. Philippe Rushton (1988) Do r/K reproductive strategies apply to human
differences?, Social Biology, 35:3-4, 337-340, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1988.9988712

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1988.9988712

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lal Article views: 7

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:42

 
Review Essay

Do r/K Reproductive Strategies Apply

to Human Differences?

J. Philippe Rushton

Department of Psychology,
University of Western Ontario,
—London, Ontario, Canada

at 13:42 08 December 2015

This book explores the boundaries
etween ecology and physiology by focomsing on metabolic rate and bioenergeStics as mediators of nutritional input and
reproductive output. Central topics in‘clude the relations between the timing
Sof Jactation and the seasonal peak in
ofood supply, the role of nutrition in reg‘culating fertility and interbirth interval,
and the means by which environmental
Sthanges in day length affect annual
‘orhythms of reproduction. Truly innovaStive, however, is the theoretical weaving
‘Sof. “energetic expenditure,” along with
Ostrategies for its measurement, among

such diverse elements of reproductive

effort as pregnancy, lactation, maternal
size, litter size, birth size, and rate of
maturation among such marsupial and
eutherian mammals as bats, grazing ruminants, kangaroos, carnivores, pinnipeds, whales, and humans. Altogether, 18 handsomely bound (but
poorly indexed) chapters present the
results of a 1986 symposium held under
the auspices of the Zoological Society of
London.

oh

a

 

REPRODUCTIVE ENERGETICS IN MAMMALS: Edited by A. S. f. Loudon and
P. A. Racey. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1987.

A remarkable degree of knowledge is
available on some species. For example,
in a section on the “Energetics of Pouch
Life,” R. W. Rose fits models to the rate
of body cooling in Tasmanian ratkangaroos at different ages. P. D. Watts
and S. E. Hansen report on the activity
levels and metabolic rates of pregnant
polar bears denning for the Canadian
winter, and G. J. Kenagy relates the annual cycles of ground squirrels in hibernation, time of mating, gestation, birth,
and {lactation to soil temperatures and
the availability of herbaceous greens
versus hypogeous fungi. J. L. Gittleman
and O. T. Oftedal show that among the
Carnivora, differences in communal
care patterns affect the rate of energy
transfer from lactating females to young
with consequent effects on growth rate
and litter mass.

Although most emphasis in the book
concerns ecology, bioenergetics, and reproduction, several authors touch on
the role of gene-based evolutionary lifehistories. Thus, P. A. McClure examines two species of rodent (Neotania

337

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

338 Review Essay

floridana, the eastern wood rat, and
Sigmodon hispidus, the hispid cotton
rat), and finds that Neotania exhibits the
slower K-life history, while Sigmodon
shows a fast r-life history. The author relates the differences in days of pregnancy (36 vs. 26), litter size (3 vs. 6), lactation time (21 vs. 12), and so forth to
differences in physiological effort. A.
Kurta and T. H. Kunz show that bats, in
contrast to nonvolant mammals of the
same size, have evolved K-strategy life
histories by producing a few large neonates with slow fetal growth, long gestation, late sexual maturation, and extreme longevity. J. A. Milne considers
the heritability of litter size in sheep and
its relation to steroid sex hormones, maternal size, and energetic efficiency.

Of prime interest for the readership
of this journal is the chapter on “The
Energetics of Human Reproduction” by
A. M. Prentice and R. G. Whitehead. A
wealth of data is provided concerning
the energy costs of pregnancy and lactation. For example, the number of kilojoules (kJ) required for the creation of
new tissue (fetal, placental, mammary)
is 42,560; for fat storage 131,208; for
new tissue maintenance, 149,352; and
for all aspects of lactation taken together, about 2000 kJ/day. These costs
can be weighed against other costs
(physical activity) and various inputs
(nourishment intake, subcutaneous fat
deposits). The stress of reproduction in
humans, in energetic terms as a proportion of total maternal metabolic turnover, is lower than in almost all other
mammals. The authors also make an interesting distinction between medical
and biological criteria. Thus, the poorly
nourished people of Africa must be
judged extremely successful in reproductive terms since they have population growth rates in excess of 4 per cent

 

Social Biology —

per annum in spite of efforts to introduce artificial methods of birth control.
By medical criteria, however, the nutritional and health status of the individuals leads to concern.

The issues raised in this book, particularly the idea that bioenergetic units
provide a currency (expressed as heat
energy or work energy) of biological activity and therefore a way to compare
animal activities directly and quantitatively, are likely to attract serious research interest for some time to come.
As R.M. Laws notes in his historical
overview, many of the ideas developed
in sociobiology and behavioral ecology
(Wilson, 1975) discuss the costs and
benefits of particular behavior patterns.
The ultimate measure of an individual’s
success is the ability to leave surviving
offspring and/or to increase the number
of relatives capable of reproduction.
The energetics of reproduction provide
a direct measure of one of the most important costs involved and may thus enable us to quantify the trade-off between
long-lived survival and offspring production which constitute an animal’s
overall life-history strategy.

THE Essay: HUMAN 7/K STRATEGIES

As alluded to above, the symbols r
and K originate in the mathematics of
population biology and refer to two ends
of a continuum in which a compensatory
exchange occurs between gamete production (the r-strategy) and longevity
(the K-strategy). Both across and within
species, r and K strategists differ in a
suite of correlated characteristics including litter size, birth spacing, speed of
physical maturation, sexual precocity,
parental care, energetic efficiency, encephalization, degree of social organization, and altruism (Eisenberg, 1981;
Wilson, 1975). Primates are all rela
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 35, No. 3-4

tively K-strategists, and humans are the
most K of all (Lovejoy, 1981). What has
been proposed, however, is that some
people are genetically more K than others (Rushton, 1985).

Generalizing from the animal literature, the more K a person is, the more
likely he or she is expected to come from
an intact family, with more intensive parental care, with fewer and more widely
spaced offspring, and with a lowered incidence of multiple birthing and infant
mortality. K’s are expected to have a
longer gestation period, a higher
birthweight, a more delayed sexual maturation, a lower sex drive, and a longer
life. Diverse organismic characteristics,
not otherwise relatable, are presumed
to covary along the K dimension.

Evidence for the expected covariation among the K attributes has been
found in several studies. For example,
Rushton (1987a) contrasted the characteristics of the mothers of dizygotic
twins who, because they produce more
than one egg at a time can be considered
to represent the r-strategy, with the
mothers of singletons representing the
K-strategy. As expected, the former
were found to have a lower age of menarche, a shorter menstrual cycle, a
higher number of marriages, a higher
rate of coitus, a greater fecundity, more
wasted pregnancies, an earlier menopause, and an earlier mortality. In another domain, Ellis (1988) contrasted
the characteristics of criminals who, because they are lower in altruism and social organization can be considered to
represent the r-strategy, with the general population representing the Kstrategy. The former were found to have
shorter gestation periods (more premature births), a more rapid development
to sexual functioning, a greater copulatory rate outside of bonded relation
Review Essay

339

ships (or at least a preference for such),
less stable bonding, lower parental investment in offspring {as evidenced by
higher rates of child abandonment, neglect and abuse), and a shorter life expectancy.

Additional evidence for r/K theory
comes from the comparison of human
populations known to differ in gamete
production, namely, lower socioeconomic > higher socioeconomic, and Negroids > Caucasoids > Mongoloids.
While the monozygotic twinning rate is
nearly constant at about 31/2 per 1,0001in
all groups, dizygotic twinning (caused
by the release of two eggs at once and
representing the r-strategy) occurs more
frequently among lower than among upper SES women in both European and
African samples, and the rate per 1,000
births among Mongoloids is < 4; among
Caucasoids, 8; and among Negroids, > 16 (Bulmer, 1970).

To examine whether this pattern of
population differences occurred in other
aspects of reproductive effort, Rushton
and Bogaert (1987) compiled a review
of the literature and carried out novel
analyses of data from the Kinsey Institute for Sex Research. The predicted
patterning was consistently observed
with estimates made of intercourse frequencies (premarital, marital, extramarital), developmental precocity (age
at first intercourse, age at first pregnancy, number of pregnancies per unit
of time, age of death), primary sexual
characteristics (size of penis, vagina, testis, ovaries), secondary sexual characteristics (salient voice, muscularity, buttocks, breasts), and biologic control of
behavior (menstrual cycle length, periodicity of sexual response, predictability
of life history from onset of puberty), as
well as in androgen levels and sexual attitudes. These differences do not appear
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

340 Review Essay

to be due to social class since
noncollege-educated whites scored
more K than elite groups of collegeeducated blacks (Rushton and Bogaert,
1988; see also Weinberg and Williams,
1988).

The pattern of racial differences observed to occur in sexual behavior has
also been found to exist on numerous
other indices of K. Across ages, samples, countries, and time periods, measures made of health (infant mortality,
illness, longevity), brain size and intelligence (cranial capacity, brain weight,
test scores), maturation rate (age to
hold head erect, age to walk alone, age
of death), social organization (marital
stability, mental disorder, law abidingness), and temperament (activity level,

 

Social Biology

anxiety, sociability), all suggest that, on
average, Mongoloids are more K than
Caucasoids, who, in turn, are more K
than Negroids (Rushton, 1988).
Recently conducted studies have extended the data in favor of 7/K theory.
Thus, Mazmanian (1987) found that numerous life-history variables were heritable in a sample of 7,620 Australian
twins, and Bogaert (1987) found that
though the magnitude of the effects
were small, many life history variables
were related and cohered in a pattern interpretable as an r/K dimension. Further research is currently underway, including whether 7/K attributes underlie
individual and social class differences in
health and longevity (Rushton, 19875).

REFERENCES

Bocaert, A. F. 1987. Reproductive strategies
in humans: Construct validation and predictive utility of the 7/K dimension. Unpublished Masters Thesis, The University
of Western Ontario, London, Canada.

Butmer, M. G. 1970. The biology of twinning
in man. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

EISENBERG, J. F. 1981. The mammalian radiations: An analysis of trends in evolution,
adaptation and behavior. Univ. of Chicago
Press, Chicago.

Exus, L. 1988. Criminal behavior and r- vs. Kselection: An extension of gene-based evolutionary theory. Personal. Individ. Differen. 9:697-—708.

Lovejoy, C. O. 1981. The origin of man. Science 211:341-—350.

MAZMANIAN, D. 1987. Life history analysis
and individual differences in humans: A
test of the application of an 7/K analysis.
Unpublished doctoral thesis, University of
Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.

Rusuton, J.P. 1985. Differential K theory:
The sociobiology of individual differences.
Personal. Individ. Differen. 6:441-—452.

 

 

 

 

. 1987a. Toward a theory of human

multiple birthing: Sociobiology and 7/K re
productive strategies. Act. Genet. Med.

Gemellol. 36:289-296.

. 1987b. An evolutionary theory, of

health, longevity, and personality: Socio
biology and r/K reproductive strategies.

Psychol. Rep. 60:539-459,

. 1988. Race differences in behavior: A
review and evolutionary analysis. Personal. Individ. Differen. 9:1009~1024.

RusnuTon, J. P., and A. F. BoGArert. 1987.
Race differences in sexual behavior: Testing an evolutionary hypothesis. J. Res.
Personal. 21:529-551.

. 1988. Race versus social class differences in sexual behavior: A follow-up test
of the r/K dimension. J. Res. Personal.
22:259~272.

WEINBERG, M.S., and C. J. WILLIAMS. 1988.
Black sexuality: A test of two theories. J.
Sex Res. 25:197-218.

Witson, E. O. 1975. Sociobiology: The new
synthesis. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge.

 
