Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Testing and clarifying a macro model of
socioeconomic change and fertility

H. C. Chang , Richard D. Warren & Brian F. Pendleton

To cite this article: H. C. Chang, Richard D. Warren & Brian F. Pendleton (1979) Testing and
clarifying a macro model of socioeconomic change and fertility, Social Biology, 26:1, 30-50, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1979.9988359

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1979.9988359

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

ee
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 7 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Testing and Clarifying a Macro Model of
Socioeconomic Change and Fertility

 

*H. C. Chang, tRichard D. Warren, and tBrian F. Pendleton

*Department of Sociology, and tDepartments of Sociology and Statistics, lowe State University, Ames, lowa;
and tDepartment of Sociology, University of Akron, Akron, Ohio

ABSTRACT: This study examines human reproduction and its causal links to the socioeconomic
conditions of society within the framework of the demographic transition. A theoretical fertility
model for one hundred countries (28 more developed countries [MDC’s] and 72 less developed
countries [LDC’s]) is subjected to path analysis. Findings for the hundred countries were mainly a
function of the LDC’s. Stronger support was found in the LDC’s for the indirect fertilityinhibiting effect of economic development than for its fertility-promoting effect. This indirect
effect was exerted on fertility through education-literacy and nutrition-diet. Education-literacy
was by far the most important cause of fertility decline, although there were smaller positive
direct effects of economic development and governmental] attitudes toward family planning on
fertility. When education-literacy was controlled, economic development became a negative, but
insignificant, influence on fertility, and the effect of governmental attitudes toward family
planning exhibited no effect on fertility. These findings suggest strongly that the improvement of
education and literacy may be an answer to fertility control. Changes in health service and infant
mortality seem natural results of the betterment of education and literacy. This study reconciles
the two distinct views as to whether fertility increases or remains stable and high while mortality
declines during early demographic transition. Both offer valid explanations for the transition in
the LDC’s. Results for the LDC’s are compared with those for the MDC’s, and policy implications
are discussed.

Although human reproduction is social
behavior subject to social, cultural, and
economic parameters, scientists have
found that some socioeconomic indicators
are more consistently related to fertility
behavior than others. However, a lack of
consensus among researchers seems to
characterize the literature in this area of
demography (Namboodiri, 1975; Mason
et al., 1971; Loewenthal and David, 1972).
A better understanding of the complex nature of reproduction is essential because of
the current rapid population growth in
less-developed areas and the multitude of
social and economic consequences of
human reproduction both in developed
and less-developed nations. This study is
an effort to examine the complexity of socioeconomic conditions of a society and
their causal links to human reproduction.

Specification of this study’s fertility
model draws primarily on demographic
transition theory. More specifically, variables related to all-encompassing terms
like “modernization” and “development”
are aligned in a temporal framework in an
attempt to rectify major questions remaining in the explication of demographic
transition theory. The model attempts to
synthesize major macro-level variables
into a logical complex of variables antecedent to fertility. Three major theoretical
questions direct this investigation. The
first deals with Heer’s (1966) statement
that the direct effect of economic development actually is to increase fertility
while the indirect effect, operating
through various intermediary variables, is
to decrease fertility. The implications,
both in terms of better understanding

30

 

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol.. 26, No. 1

macro-level causa] linkages within the
framework of transition theory and
population-relevant policies made by governments attempting to lower fertility, are
staggering.

Secondly, demographic transition
theory is vague in its description of the
relationship between fertility and mortality at the beginning of the transition. Demographers have debated whether economic development stimulates fertility before fertility declines (Teitelbaum, 1974,
p. 745). Some (e.g., Petersen, 1975, 462-—
463) argue that demographic history
clearly indicates that a rise in fertility, together with a decline in mortality (mostly a
decline in infant mortality) is responsible
for rapid population growth. An upsurge
in fertility has been observed at the beginning of economic development (e.g.,
Adelman, 1963; Heer, 1966; Weintraub,
1962). Some (e.g., Kammeyer, 1975) believe that mortality decline alone is the
cause of such growth during socioeconomic development. Yet others (most notably Preston, 1978) report conclusively
that infant mortality does not explain fertility. This study attempts to clarify this
stage of the transition.

Third, Holsinger and Kasarda (1976)
argue that governments of high-fertility
nations should make special efforts to increase general educational levels if fertility
reduction is to occur. The linkages between education and other major societal
institutions (e.g., those relating to health,
communications, development, nutrition)
are not understood, and the fertility-related
policy implications for governments
down-playing the importance of general
education and literacy, within the total
context of major macro-level variables,
has not been clearly delineated. Would
other societal institutions serve as
fertility-inhibiting surrogates when education is not emphasized? Are the educational components of family planning pro
Socioeconomic Change and Fertility

31

grams and mass media communications
alone sufficient to support fertility reductions? This study attempts to provide
some direction in understanding the degree to which overall education or literacy is important within the larger context
of transition theory.

The purpose of the following review is
to demonstrate briefly the complexity of
human reproductive behavior and to identify those variables most important for
constructing a model of human reproduction.

A THEORETICAL MODEL OF HUMAN
REPRODUCTION

Past research has turned up some causal
links between socioeconomic variables
and fertility. Major variables and associated research are discussed below.

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Of all the antecedents to fertility, economic development is among the most discussed in demography. Weintraub (1962)
reported that income increments tended to
generate increases in birth rates and that
birth rates were negatively related to urbanization and positively related to infant
mortality. A study by Adelman (1963) presented results similar to those of Weintraub. Per-capita income was positively
related to the age-specific birth rates; the
index of education, the percentage of labor
force employed outside agriculture, and
population density all were negatively related to the fertility of each age group.
Heer (1966), following up on Adelman’s
study, found the index of education correlated most strongly with fertility, followed
by population density. Per-capita income
and percentage of the labor force outside
agriculture were the least important.

These studies seem to corroborate, albeit only partly and perhaps weakly, earlier studies reporting positive correlations
between indicators of income and fertility.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

32 Chang

For example, Yule (1906) and Ogburn and
Thomas (1922) reported a positive association between the business cycle and fertility in Great Britain during the nineteenth
century and in the United States between
1870 and 1920, respectively. Galbraith
and Thomas (1941) and Kirk (1942) also
reported that an increase in fertility was
positively related to prosperity. More recently, Becker’s (1960) provocative economic theory of fertility has stimulated a
sudden interest in the positive incomefertility hypothesis, resulting in a rapid
proliferation of the literature. Easterlin
(1962) found that economic development
promotes fertility. One of the important
causes to which the American baby boom
after World War II is attributed was the
high income of persons 20-29 years old,
the potential parents.

While these studies found that economic
development promotes fertility, the opposite view, predicting an inhibiting effect
of economic development on fertility, also prevails. This effect is described by
the theory of demographic transition
(Thompson, 1929, 1944; Blacker, 1947;
Davis, 1949; Notestein, 1945; Coale and
Hoover, 1958). It is an effect which essentially is a demographic-change version of
the theory of culture lag (Ogburn, 1927).

Heer (1966, p. 430) tested transition
theory in a study of 41 developed and developing nations and found a direct positive effect of economic development on
fertility but stronger indirect effects, promoted by development, that had the actual effect of decreasing fertility.

Friedlander and Silver (1967) classified
85 countries by their level of development.
They discovered that the relationship between income and fertility varied with
levels of development of countries: positive for developed countries and negative
for underdeveloped countries. A chronological study designed to test Heer’s
findings reported that economic develop
 

et al. Social Biology
ment led to an increase in educational
level and a decline in infant mortality,
which is an optimal condition for low fertility (Ekanem, 1972). Ekanem attributed the lack of full support for Heer’s
conclusion to poor quality data from the
underdeveloped countries.

These two views concerning the effect
of economic development on fertility, both
of which are affirmatively supported by
researchers, need be reconciled to increase
the predictive power of demographic
transition theory.

EDUCATION

Besides recognizing an inverse relationship between per-capita income and fertility, Heer (1966) joined Adelman (1963) in
reporting a positive relationship between
income and fertility and an inverse relationship between level of education and
fertility. According to Bogue (1969, p.
677), these findings seem very surprising
because “educational attainment and percapita income are positively correlated
with each other.”

Empirical evidence on the inverse relationship between educational level and
fertility has been overwhelming, both in
intercountry and intracountry analyses.
For example, it has been found in Puerto
Rico that advancement in the number of
years of schooling for women is associated
with a significant decline in birth rates
(Jaffe, 1959; Stycos, 1967). This relationship also has been reported for various
societies such as Greece, Portugal, Hungary, Brazil, Iran, Taiwan, and others
(see Loewenthal and David, 1972; the
American Universities Field Staff, 1972).
There is, however, conflicting evidence.
Adelman’s study (see Heer, 1966, p. 427)
shows that the index of education is the
variable most strongly associated with fertility at each age while Janowitz (1971)
reports a weak inverse relationship between fertility and literacy. Extremely

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 26, No. 1

weak relationships also have been found
by others (Freedman et al., 1959; Yaukey,
1962) in different cultural settings. Another study reported that education has no
bearing at all on actual fertility (Schultz,
1971).

Various explanations have been offered
as to why education discourages reproduction. Heer (1966, p. 428) explained the rise
in educational level as having two consequences conducive to fertility decline: an
increased flow of communication of all
types and a rise in the proportion of adolescents and young adults attending
school. The increase in communication
could enhance the exchange of knowledge
and ideas, including birth control information. An increase in adolescents and young
adults attending school would mean an
increase in the average age at marriage.
Both consequences would be inimical to
high fertility. Rich (1973, pp. 10-13) regarded changing values and norms accompanying educational advancement to
be fertility-inhibiting. He felt that educated and literate persons were more likely
to adopt innovations more quickly and to
come in contact with family planners.
Education leads also to a delay in marriage and provides knowledge about alternatives to childbearing (Nam, 1968, p.
515).

INFANT MORTALITY

Infant mortality appears to be a strong
stimulus for fertility change. A decline in
infant mortality, which accounts for most
of the decline in general mortality during
the beginning of the demographic transition, was posited by Davis (1963; see also
Burch, 1975; Carlsson, 1966) as the demographic stimulus for creating a situation of sustained natural increase. The
population responds to the _ resulting
pressure through a multiphasic response,
drawing on rural-to-urban migration,
postponement of marriage, contraceptive

Socioeconomic Change and Fertility

33

usage, etc., to alter demographic behavior
and lower fertility. However, before fertility is lowered, it may, in fact, rise. A
number of studies have reported a strong
positive causal link between infant mortality and fertility (Heer, 1966, p. 423; Weintraub, 1962, p. 816; Adelman, 1963, p.
328). Other studies, however, report that
levels of infant mortality do not explain
fertility (see Preston, 1978).

Heer and Smith (1968, p. 104), using
simulation techniques, demonstrated a
steady decline in gross reproduction rates
as infant mortality decreases, under the
assumption “that parents have a perfect
method of birth control but also want to be
highly certain that at least one son will
survive to the father’s 65th birthday so
that he can support his parents in their old
age.” Heer (1966), in another study, maintained that to reduce fertility, mortality
might have to be decreased by public
health programs, even at the cost of a
temporary increase in the rate of population growth. The argument is basically
one of interplay between child and parental security. Where infant and child
mortality is high, parents are unlikely to
limit childbearing. Parents want to be sure
that a certain number of their offspring
survive to adulthood. When parents are
convinced that they will be cared for in
their old age, the family size may be reduced. Harrington (1971, pp. 30-32) examined infant and child mortality for
Ghana, Niger, and Upper Volta and identified two interactive effects between infant and child mortality and childbearing:

1, The early experience of child death spurs
women to have a large number of births.

2. The breakdown of certain traditional
practices leads to the shortening of birth
spacing. A child’s death may be caused
indirectly by the birth of a subsequent
child because of abrupt weaning.

She maintained that efforts should be
made to promote maternal and child

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

34 Chang

health before family planning and that
family planning can play an undeniably
important role in improving birth spacing.
Chandrasekhar (1972), after a detailed
discussion of the situation in India, concluded that the solution to India’s rapid
population growth lies in the reduction of
both infant mortality and fertility at the
same time. This view emphasizes the role
of family planning that is dedicated to
bringing fertility under control, although
the objectives of family planning also can
be achieved by controlling infant mortality. A positive relationship between infant
mortality and fertility is posited.

NUTRITION-DIET

The relationship between nutrition and
development is ambiguous. As a country
develops, the purchasing power of the
population will rise. Consequently, more
money will be used to buy food, and thus
nutrition is improved (Berg, 1973). In
international studies, this view seems to
have received support (e.g., Turnham,
1971, p. 89). McIntosh (1975) provides a
summary of similar and contradictory
findings. Nutrition and diet are here regarded as an indicator of development because malnutrition is largely a phenomenon of underdevelopment.

On the other hand, education-literacy
has been shown to bear upon nutrition and
diet, which, in turn, affects infant and
child mortality (McIntosh, 1975, p. 8183). For instance, maternal literacy rates
have been found to be a strong determinant of the level of undernourishment and
the growth rate of children. In the meantime, malnutrition has been found to account for 53 per cent of all deaths of children 0-4 years of age in certain Latin
American countries (Bengoa, 1974).

POPULATION PER PHYSICIAN

Previous studies have used population
per hospital bed as a health-service indi
et al. Social Biology
cator to study fertility and mortality
changes (United Nations, 1965). The present study uses “population per physician”
as a health-service indicator on the assumption that availability of physicians is
a prerequisite to medical and health services. Kusukawa (1967) reported that
about one-third of the variance in life expectancy at birth might be explained by
health services alone. The decline of mortality in the world has been attributed to
the progress in economic and social development and to efforts made in improving
health and preventing diseases and deaths
(United Nations, 1963, p. 15). Nonetheless, the complexity of the causes of mortality change can be seen in Eldridge’s
(1952, p. 1) summary that, “gains in health
and longevity through improved nutrition,
personal hygiene, public sanitation, and
availability of medical services and
facilities have resulted from pervasive socia) changes associated with improved agricultural methods, the spread of education, and technological progress.”

The theoretical model, therefore, predicts that health service, represented by
the population-physician ratio, is a result
of development and the improvement of
education and that the availability of
physicians or health care in a society helps
reduce infant mortality. Of course, the
population-physician ratio tells little about
the actual accessibility of physicians for
all sectors of society. A negative relation
of education-literacy to population per
physician is hypothesized because the
training of highly skilled professionals,
such as medical doctors, requires a society’s dedication to the improvement of
education.

USE OF MASS MEDIA

The possession and use of mass communication media, such as TV and radio,
as a result of development (Shannon,
1957, p. 97; United Nations, 1967, p.
—|
=
©
N
~
oO
=
oO
oO
oO
a
Co
©
oo
nm
nN
=
—
CS
‘g
Ss
oN
aon
O
3
Cd
©
>>
—
—
N
~
oO
>
os
c
~.
ve
Oo
vo
oO
co
CS
©
—
c
S
©
OQ

 

Vol. 26, No. 1

770~772) is indicative of broadened
sources of information and communication, including birth-control information.
Adelman and Morris (1966), using number
of radios and newspaper circulation to indicate the prevalence of mass media communication in 55 less-developed countries,
reported that mass media communication
explained more than 46 per cent of the
variance in the crude birthrate. Our model
regards mass media as among several
variables intermediate between development and fertility. Since radio and TV rely
mostly on verbal communication, no relation is assumed between  educationliteracy and the use of mass media.

GOVERNMENTAL ATTITUDE TOWARD
FAMILY PLANNING

The relationship between governmental
attitude or influence and fertility change is
very ambiguous and has not been the subject of many investigations (Spengler,
1938; National Academy of Sciences,
1971). Pendleton (1976) attempted to

+

X

0

Socioeconomic Change and Fertility 35

quantify Puerto Rican policies and programs, both governmental and_nongovernmental, and was able to identify
those that seemed to have had the greatest
impact both on birth and fertility rates.
Another study investigates governmental
pronatalist influences for pre-World War II
Italy, Germany, and Sweden (Pendleton, 1978) and attempts to dichotomize
governmental decrees and anti-familyplanning programs into coercive and noncoercive categories. Despite ambiguities
regarding the link between governmental
attitudes toward family planning and fertility, it seems that the overt recognition
of, and support for, family planning programs by governments may assist in fertility reduction.

Figure 1 illustrates a theoretical model
of causal relationships between socioeconomic development and fertility. No assumptions are made concerning causal relations among economic development, urbanization, and per-capita GNP growth;
these relations may very well be interac
 

FIG. 1.—The theoretical model: X,, Fertility; X2, Infant mortality; X3, Use of mass media; X,, Governmental attitude toward family planning; X;, Population per physician; X¢, Nutrition-diet; X;, Education-literacy;
Xz, Economic development; X,, Urbanization; X39, Per-capita GNP growth.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

36 Chang

tive (Sjoberg and Sjoberg, 1960). Economic development and urbanization also
may evolve independent of each other and
may be mutually irreducible (Smelser,
1973). Because of this, economic development, urbanization, and per-capita
GNP growth are considered to be exogenous variables and are juxtaposed to examine the effects they may have upon the
other socioeconomic and demographic
conditions that, in turn, affect fertility.
On the basis of past research, this model
assumes a direct relation between economic development (X.) and fertility (X,).
There also are the direct influences of economic development, urbanization (X64),
and per-capita GNP growth (X19) on
education-literacy (X7), the use of mass
media (X3), nutrition-diet (X,), and population per physician (X;5), In accordance
with past findings, education-literacy is
given a central location from which it
causes changes in fertility both directly
and indirectly. The indirect effect passes
on to fertility through infant mortality
(X2), which is determined by population
per physician and nutrition-diet. Infant
mortality is assumed to have a positive
effect upon fertility as shown in past research. Nutrition-diet, population per
physician, and use of mass media are introduced as intermediary variables in the
model. All three are assumed to be determined by economic development, urbanization, and per-capita GNP growth. The
direction of relationships is indicated by
plus (positive) and minus (negative) signs.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

SELECTION OF COUNTRIES

This study investigates countries of
varying degrees of development. As with
any cross-cultural comparison, demographic
and socioeconomic secondary data of various degrees of accuracy and adequacy

 

et al. Social Biology
must be dealt with (Taylor and Hudson,
1972, pp. 7~8; Riley, 1965; Gaete-Darbo,
1964). The problem, more specifically, is
one of data deficiencies in quantity and
quality for the less-developed countries.

Through a lengthy process of search,
one hundred countries were selected for
which 28 socioeconomic and demographic
variables seemed most usable. These variables seem to provide the best balance between variable needs of this study and
requirements for accurate and valid data
(i.e., variables with few missing data). Of
the one hundred countries or territories
(Table 1), 28 are more developed (MDC’s)
and 72 are less developed (LDC’s), representing a total population of 1,643,800,000
in 1973. The range is from a low of
300,000 inhabitants to a high of
600,000,000 inhabitants. This is not a
random sample of countries because their
selection was predicated upon the availability of needed data. The classification
of countries is based on Kuznets (1969, p.
157). The more developed countries include Japan, all countries in Europe
(except Albania, because of her high population growth rate, and the Democratic
Republic of Germany, because of missing
observations), Australia, New Zealand, and
Canada. Developed countries excluded
are the United States, as an extreme case
of development; South Africa, which consists virtually of two distinct societies; and
Puerto Rico and the USSR because of
missing data. Argentina, Venezuela, and
Israel have very high birth rates (much
higher than the countries of Europe) resulting in their classification as LDC’s.
Uruguay’s exclusion from the MDC’s is
due to its relatively low GNP per capita.
The LDC’s are found exclusively in Asia,
Africa, and Latin America.

Twenty-six of an original 28 variables
were grouped into eight small clusters on
the basis of variable similarity, relevancy
to the composite, and intercorrelations

 

 

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 1

 

 

Socioeconomic Change and Fertility 37

TABLE 1

List OF ONE HuNDRED LEssS DEVELOPED (LDC’s) AND More DEVELOPED (MDC’s) COUNTRIES IN
THEORETICAL FERTILITY MODEL

Less Developed Countries

More Developed
Countries

Africa Honduras Asia

Algeria Jamaica Japan

Cameroon Mexico

Central African Republic Nicaragua Europe

Chad Panama Austria

Congo (Brazzaville) Belgium

Dahomey South America Bulgaria

Egypt Argentina Czechoslovakia

Ethiopia Bolivia Denmark

Gabon Brazil Federal Republic of

Gambia Chile Germany

Ghana Colombia Finland

Guinea Ecuador France

Ivory Coast Guyana Greece

Kenya Paraguay Hungary

Liberia Peru Iceland

Libya Uruguay Ireland

Malagasy Republic Venezuela Italy

Mali Luxemburg

Mauritania Asia Netherlands

Morocco Afghanistan Norway

Niger Burma Poland

Nigeria Taiwan Portugal

Senegal Cyprus Romania

Sierra Leone Hong Kong Spain

Somalia India Sweden

Sudan Indonesia Switzerland

Tunisia Iraq United Kingdom

Uganda Israe) Yugoslavia

Upper Volta Jordan

Zaire Korea, Rep. of Oceania

Zambia Kuwait Australia
Lebanon New Zealand

Central America Pakistan

Barbados Philippines North America

Costa Rica Singapore Canada ;

Dominican Republic Syria

EI! Salvadore Thailand

Guatemala Turkey

Haiti

among individual variables within an intended composite.

COMPOSITE CONSTRUCTION

To allow approximately equal weighting of the individual variables in the composite, Z-scores (or standard scores) were
computed for all variables within the
composite:

where x represents the mean of a particu
lar variable for all countries, x; is the
value of that variable for'country 7, and s
is the standard deviation. The sum of the
standard scores was divided by the number of variables in the composite to form
the index. Missing values for each variable
were estimated by the average of the calculated Z-scores. In al] instances, the representativeness of the composite for individual variables seemed adequate; the
composites showed high correlations with
their constituent variables. This procedure
minimizes the “statistical incest” problem

 
38 Chang et al. Social Biology

found when any statistical routine is Table 2 provides a summary of variables
adopted to estimate missing data (Taylor and dates of the data.

and Hudson, 1972, p. 13). Fertility (X,) is a composite built from
the most recent crude birth rate for each
COMPOSITE/VARIABLE DESCRIPTION AND country (around 1970-72 for LDC’s and
DEFINITION 1973-74 for MDC’s) and the gross reproBelow is a detailed description of each duction rate between 1965 and 1970.
composite and the two single variables. Infant mortality (X,) consists of infant
TABLE 2

COMPOSITES AND SINGLE VARIABLES

Variable No Variable Descnption

Composite variables

Xypeecescecas Lokibe seen seeeeee. Fertility
Crude birth rate, 1974
Gross reproduction rate, 1965-1970

D, Infant Mortality
Infant mortality rate, 1972 or latest
Life expectancy at birth (—), 1972 or latest

> Use of Mass Media
T.V. receivers per 1,000 population, 1971
Radio receivers per 1,000 population, 1970

D, Diet and Nutrition
Per-capita calorie intake, per day, latest
Per-capita grams of protein, per day, latest
Per-capita % animal protein, per day, latest

MA saved Reed ge by pep Sd HSE e RS dé Education and Literacy
Primary school enrollment ratio, 1968-1970
Secondary school enrollment ratio, 1968-1970
Pupil-teacher ratio for primary ed. (—), 1968-1970
Vocational enrollment as a % of secondary education enrollment,

1967-1970

Adult literacy rate, latest
Females as a % of total secondary ed., 1968-1970
Students as a % of 5—19 age group, latest
Daily newspapers per 1,000 population, 1970

> COTTE TTETCCETSS EET OL Te Tey Economic Development
Per-capita energy consumption, 1971
Electric power consumption, 1971
Newsprint consumption per capita, 1971
% of income from agriculture (-—), 1970-1971
Per-capita GNP, 1971

ee ee eee ee ee ee Urbanization
% population urban, 1972 or latest
% population in cities of 100,000; 1972 or latest

May og 00 oo pase og fg Po Oe See be Per-capita GNP Growth
Growth of per-capita GNP, 1960-1971
Growth of per-capita GNP, 1965~1971

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

D, Government Attitude Toward Family Planning, 1969
>, Population per Physician, latest

 

 

SouRCcES AND NOTES

Fertility United Nations (1971, pp xxx-xxx1v, 1974, pp 244-248) Crude birth rates are for 1970 for 41 LDC’s, the remaining LDC crude birth
rates are for 1972 or 1973 Rates for 23 MDC’s are for 1974, five are for 1973 Gross reproduction rates are taken from Monthly Bullenn of
Statistics, United Nations, Apni, 1971, Vol XXV, No 4, pp xxx-xxxiv

Infant Vertahty US Bureau of the Census (1974)

Use of Mass Uedia United Nations (1967, 19725, pp 832-840), Europa (1973), Instituto InterAmericana de Estadistica (1972)

Diet and Nutrition Agency for International Development (1973a), United Nations (19726, pp 524-530), World Bank (nd }

Education and Literacy Agency for International Development (1973a, 1973c), United Nations (19725), US Department of Commerce, 1973,
World Bank (n d ), Europa (1973)

Economic Development United Nations (19720, 1972c, 1972d)}, Agency for International Development (19734, 1973c}

Uroanization US Bureau of the Census (1974), Agency for International Development (1973a@), Population Reference Bureau (1973)

Per-capita GVP Growth World Bank (1973)

Governmental Attitude Toward Family Planning United Nations (1972a)

Population per physwuan Agency for Internatonal Development (1973¢, 19735), United Nations (1972)

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 1

mortality rates and life expectancy at
birth. Life expectancy at birth is a superior
measure of mortality because it is free
from the influence of the age structure. It
refers to the average number of years a
cohort of newly born could expect to live
according to prevailing mortality rates. Infant mortality rates and life expectancy at
birth are of opposing signs, and the composite was built with consideration of that
fact.

Use of mass media (X3) is a composite
where the number of TV receivers and
radio receivers per thousand population is
assumed to reflect the scope of exposure to
mass communications messages, including
birth control information.

Governmental] attitudes toward family
planning programs (X4) is based on a
United Nations (1972a) publication that
classifies high-fertility nations in terms of
governmental policies toward family
planning. A first group of thirty countries
had, by mid-1969, incorporated family
planning into their plans for economic development, a _ responsible government
official had proclaimed such a policy, and
activities had clearly indicated the presence of such a policy. A second group consisted of twelve countries where governments had supported and assisted familyplanning activities but had adopted no
official policy. A third group included five
countries where policies were still evolving, and a residual group contained countries where neither an official nor a private
movement had yet occurred by mid-1969.
Countries in Group 1 were assigned a
score of 4 to reflect governmental favorability toward family planning; those in
groups 2, 3, and 4 were assigned scores 3,
2, 1, respectively. Recognizing the crude
nature of this measurement and the lack of
a better indicator, we shall test the relationship of governmental attitude to fertility changes. This composite applies only to
the 72 LDC’s because it would be mean
Socioeconomic Change and Fertility

39

ingless and perhaps impossible to assign
scores to countries where fertility already
is at a low level.

Population per physician (X5) is a single
variable to be used as an indicator of the
availability of health services because effective health services depend largely
upon the number of medical doctors. This
variable should be interpreted as the
larger the ratio, the less available are the
health services.

The nutrition and diet (X,g) composite
involves three variables, per-capita calorie
intake per day, per-capita grams of protein per day, and per-capita percentage of
animal protein per day.

Education and literacy (X,) contains individual variables reflecting education at
primary and secondary levels and adult
literacy. The United Nations recommended the investigation of educational
attainment as basic to a census, and consequently, at least seventy countries obtained answers to the question of educational attainment of their populations in a
census or a national sample survey in the
1955-63 period (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1971:328). Because the efforts of the
United Nations can assume a reasonable
degree of accuracy in the variables on education and literacy, we constructed a composite on education and literacy by using
all eight variables. All vary positively with
education and literacy except the pupilteacher ratio for primary education, which
varies negatively with level of education
and literacy. This fact was accounted for
in the composite. This composite reflects
the dedication of a country to the improvement of education and is, therefore,
an indirect measure of the educational
level achieved by that country.

Economic development (Xx), as a general economic composite, takes into consideration industrialization as reflected by
such variables as per-capita energy consumption per year, per-capita electric

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

40 Chang et al.

power consumption per year, and percapita newsprint consumption per year,
and income represented by the percentage
of income from agriculture (a negative
variable) and per-capita GNP. Economic
development should be interpreted differently from general development, which refers to economic development, urbanization, and per-capita GNP growth.

An urbanization (X 9) index was computed from the percentage of population
defined as urban and percentage of population in cities with one hundred thousand
or more inhabitants. The definition of
urban population varies considerably from
country to country, and about thirty
definitions of urban population are currently in use (Macura, 1961; Petersen,
1975, pp. 467-476; United Nations, 1973,
pp. 5-12). Because we had only limited
choice of data, we decided to use percentage of population urban as one of the variables for indexing in spite of differences in
the definition of urban population from
country to country. This was done under
the assumption that when “countries tend
to exercise some common sense in their
statistical services, their own mode of
classifying their people deserves respect”
(Davis, 1969, pp. 11-12). But, to provide
a double-check, we chose also to use percentage of population in cities of one hundred thousand or more population as a
supplementary variable in the index. The
composite should reflect urbanization
more accurately than either variable individually.

Per-capita GNP growth (X19) for two
periods, 1960-70 and 1965-71, was combined to obtain this composite. Because it
does not reflect the size of per-capita GNP,
it differs from Xg, which, only in part,
indicates per-capita GNP.

RESULTS
Path analysis was used to test the causal
links presented in Figure 1. First, all paths

 

Social Biology

in the theoretical model were tested.
Then, following Duncan’s (1966) suggestion, we dropped the paths that were both
statistically and substantively insignificant
from further analysis. The theoretical
model then was revised and tested. After
the insignificant paths were dropped, identical analyses were done separately for
the LDC’s (NV = 72), the MDC’s (N = 28),
and the total sample (V = 100).

For the MDC’s, the theoretical model
fell far short in predicting causal links. Of
the 22 causal paths predicted, only four
were supported, two strongly. For this
reason, MDC’s paths are only discussed
and not tabularly or graphically displayed.
Economic development was found to be
the positive determinant of the use of
mass media (moderately strong effect)
and education-literacy (strong effect);
education-literacy negatively determines
infant mortality (strong). Fertility in the
MDC’s was related only to educationliteracy, and this relationship was extremely weak.

Findings for the one hundred countries
refiect those of the 72 LDC’s rather than of
the 28 MDC’s. With only minor exceptions, all causal links for the hundred
countries are in the same direction and are
approximately of the same magnitude as
the LDC’s. For this reason, we believe it
more meaningful to report findings for the
LDC only, with mentions of the total
sample wherever findings for the two
samples are different. Table 3 presents results for the LDC’s; Figure 2 graphically
displays the causal links. Table 4 and Figure 3 display comparable results for the
total sample.

With one exception, the same variables
were used to analyze both samples. The
measure of governmental position on family planning in LDC’s increased the causal
links predicted from the 22 for the total
sample to 27 in the model for the LDC’s.
Of these 27 causal paths in the theoretical

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 1 Socioeconomic Change and Fertility 4]

TABLE 3

PARTIAL REGRESSION ANALYSIS: PATH MODELS | AND 2 (LDC’s)

 

 

 

Dependent and Standardized % Variance
Independent Variables F* Partials Explained
X,-Education-Literacy ......... Lee wae 0.69
X,~Economic Development .. 9.24 0.31 a
X g~Urbanization............ 33.48 0.58
X,-Governmental Attitude
Toward Family Planning .... wet Tr 0.19
X7,~-Education-Literacy ...... 15.65 0.64 aus
Xs-Economic Development .. 6.49 -0.41
X;5-Population per Physician .... - nw 8 0.43
X7-Education-Literacy ...... §1.13 —0.65 2 ae
X,-Nutrition-Diet.............. ee tee 0.44
Xs-Economic Development .. 6.76 0.36 _
X, —-Urbanization............ 6.66 0.35
X2-Infant Mortality ............ a bas 0.82 (0.53)t
X;5—Population per Physician . 3.18§ (37,12) 0.12§ (0.54)t jt
Xs—Nutrition-Diet .......... 0.77§ (14.43)£ —0.05§ (-—0.33)t
X7—-Education-Literacy ...... 106.90 —0.79
X Fertility? «occa veiw ent caasue vee tae 0.67 (0.43)t
X,-Education-Literacy ...... 47.77 —0.82 woe
X,-Governmental Attitudes
Toward Family Planning . 5 46 (0.28)t§ 0.19 (—0.05)£§
X>-Nutrition-Diet .......... 19.69 (17.23)t —0.41 (-0.50)£
Xs—-Economic Development .. 7.19  (3.23)4§ 0.32 (—0.21)t§

 

* Significant at p < 0 001 unless specified not significant

+ X,~Fertility was constructed from crude birth rates and gross reproduction rates (GRR’s) Since GRR’s for the LDC’s were probably estimates
rather than calculations from age-specific birth rates, the authors therefore recalculated the partial regressions by eliminating GRR’s from X, This
was done to test if the results would be sufficiently different from the original] to warrant changes 1n the content of analysis Because the orginal
relationships were not affected by this procedure, no changes in the analysis were made

t Figures and remarks in parentheses indicate new values and situations resulting when education-literacy (¥7) is removed as an independent
variable

§ Not significant

Fic. 2.—Standardized partials for Model 1 using the LDC’s (72 countries).

 

*Not significant
*X io 18 retained in the model to facihtate comparison with findings for the hundred country sample (Modet 3 in Figure 3)

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Chang et al.

Social Biology

TABLE 4

PARTIAL REGRESSION ANALYSIS: PATH MODELS 3 AND 4 (TOTAL SAMPLE)

AZ
Dependent and
Independent Variables Fe
X7~Education-Literacy ........ Lee
X,g~-Economic Development 70.58
X,-Urbanization .......... 24.22
X yo~Per-Capita GNP Growth 11.52
X 5-Population per Physician... aT
X7~Education-Literacy ..... 68.07
Xe—Nutrition-Diet ............ be
X7~Education-Literacy ..... 18.78
Xg—Economic Development 31.64
X,-Infant Mortality .......... Lae
X7—-Education-Literacy ..... 112.76
X5~Population per Physician 8.90 (52.88)
X,-Nutrition-Diet ......... 0.32§ (92.46)t
X1—-FertilityT .......-00 020008 a
Xe—-Nutrition-Diet ......... 34.88 (60.81)¢
Xs-Economic Development 1.37§ (3.5)4§
X7-Education-Literacy ..... 50.69

* Significant at p < 0 O01 unless specified not significant

Standardized % Variance

Partials Explained

wee 0.79

0.55 eed

0.33

0.17

Lae 0.41
—0.64

wee 0.75

0.39

0.51

er 0.87 (0.72)¢
—-0.81

0.14 (0.43)4
~0.04§ (-—0.57)¢

aw 8 0.84 (0.75)f
~—0.48 (-—0.72)£

0.10§ {—0.17)t§
~0.57

+ \\-Ferthitv was constructed from crude birth rates and gross reproduction rates (GRR’s) Since GRR’s for the LDC’s were probably estimates
rather than calculations from age-specific birth rates, the authors therefore recalculated the partial regressions bv eliminating GRR's from ¥, This
was done to test if the results would be sufficient, different from the orginal to warrant changes in the content of analysis Because the onginal
relationships were not affected by this procedure, no changes in the analysis were made

t Figures and remarks in parentheses indicate new values and situations resulung when education-hiteracy (V7) » removed as an independent

variable
§ Not significant

model, 14 were significant and used in the
revised model.

Economic development (X3), reflecting
level of industrialization and per-capita
income, and urbanization (X,) play a
major role in affecting education-literacy

(X7). Per-capita GNP growth (X49)
dropped out completely from the analysis.
In the total sample, however, (see Table 4)
per-capita GNP growth (Xj) did exert
some influence (B = 0.17). Governmental
attitudes towards family planning (X,) are

Fic. 3.—Standardized partials for Model 3 using the total sample of one hundred countries.

. X. _

 
  
 

-70

024 X

«32

Xo

*Not significant These paths are left mn to compare with models for LDC’s
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 26, No. 1

determined by a moderately strong inverse
influence from economic development and
a strong positive impact from educationliteracy.

A high level of education-literacy (X7)
functions to reduce the populationphysician ratio (X5) and, therefore, to increase the availability of health services.
Population per physician, however, has no
significant effect on infant mortality (X>).
The direct effect of education-literacy on
infant mortality is strongly negative.

Economic development (X,) and urbanization (X,), rather than educationliteracy (X7), determine nutrition-diet (X¢).
Improved nutrition and diet, however,
does not influence infant mortality (X92).

Fertility in the LDC’s is directly affected
by a moderately strong, positive impact by
economic development (Xx). Economic
development also is negatively related to
governmental attitudes (X,) and positively
related to education-literacy (X7). The
causal influence of economic development
and urbanization (Xg) over reproductive
behavior (X,) is exerted through education-literacy, the effect of which is
negative on fertility, and governmental attitudes toward family planning (X,), the
result of which, surprisingly, is a very
small positive effect on fertility. Fertility
(X,) is strongly affected negatively by
nutrition-diet (XYg) and education-literacy
(X7). In the total sample, however, the
influence of economic development on fertility is negligible. Instead, its effect operates through education-literacy (X7). Infant mortality, although highly correlated
with fertility (ry = 0.68), is not a causal
factor of fertility levels.

In summary, strong support was found
for the hypothesis predicting the indirect
fertility-inhibiting effect of economic development. This indirect effect is exerted
through education-literacy and nutritiondiet. Infant mortality, surprisingly, has no
causal effect on fertility. The direct effect

Socioeconomic Change and Fertility

43

of economic development encouraging fertility cannot be discounted for the LDC’s.
This positive effect may reflect the hypothesized fertility increase discussed by
Habakkuk (1965), Krause (1958), Petersen
(1975), Kirk and Nortman (1973), and
Easterlin (1962), which occurs near the
beginning of the demographic transition as
more women survive through their reproductive years, bearing more children.

These findings show the differential
influence of education-literacy over fertility. Given the importance of educationliteracy in determining fertility, another
model was tested to explore more fully the
policy effect of education-literacy. The
link between education-literacy and fertility was dropped from the model. The reconstructed fertility model is displayed in
Figure 4. Figure 5 displays comparable
results for the total sample.

Without education-literacy the influence both of economic development (X3)
and governmental attitudes toward family planning (X4) on fertility become insignificant. The only causal effect on fertility is a strong negative influence from
nutrition-diet (X,). Also, nutrition-diet becomes a moderately strong causal agent to
infant mortality (X,), and the effect of the
population-per-physician ratio (X5) on infant mortality is strengthened greatly.
Again, infant mortality fails to be a determining factor of fertility. Thus, nutrition-diet in the LDC’s becomes the surrogate influence for education-literacy when
the latter’s influence is removed.

In agreement with past research, these
findings assign considerable importance to
education-literacy as a variable affecting
reproductive behavior, both directly and
indirectly.

DISCUSSION

This study assumes that socioeconomic
and demographic changes create condi
 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

44 Chang et al.

Social Biology

Fic. 4.—-Standardized partials for Model 2 (alternative) with the LDC’s (72 countries).

  

10°

*Not significant

~68

 

*X 19 18 retarned in the model to factlitate comparison with findings for the hundred country sample (Model 4 in Figure 4)

tions affecting the decision-making process, which, in turn, lead to changes in
fertility. The findings need careful scrutiny to gain insight into human reproduction and how it is determined by socioeconomic and demographic factors.
Ignorance seems to be the worst enemy
of reproduction control. The lower the
education-literacy level of a population,
the higher is its fertility. This finding is
true especially for the LDC’s. This study
has demonstrated that education-literacy
is very effective in bringing fertility under
control in the LDC’s. It has demonstrated
also that the benefits of this effect are not
without cost. Moderately strong and weak

positive influences on fertility from economic development and governmental attitudes toward family planning, respectively, occur in conjunction with the extremely strong and moderately strong
negative influence that education-literacy
and nutrition-diet have on fertility. It is
not clear, however, how the level of
education-literacy is related to, say, age at
marriage and participation of women in
the labor force, both of which may have
an inverse effect on fertility. Many studies
report that education determines the use of
birth- or conception-control devices, i.e.,
the higher the educational attainment of
husband and wife, the greater is the use of

Fic. § —Standardized partials for Model 4 (alternative) using the total sample of one hundred countries.

=
x _~

8 me

 

*Not significant This path 1s left in to compare with models for LDC’s

 

_ ~» 1L7*

81
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 26, No. 1

contraceptive methods. Freedman and

Takeshita (1969, pn. 340-41) found in

Taiwan, for example, that “the better
educated women wanted and had fewer

children and began to use contraception

earlier than the less-educated women
»

Bogue (1969, p. 676) believed that a
major driving force behind fertility control
is education. He suggested that “if this is
the case, it should be comparatively easy
to discover what aspect of rising literacy
and educational attainment is most intimately related to lower fertility and then
to ‘mass-produce’ it. . . to hasten fertility
decline in advance of other aspects of educational attainment.” Bogue (1969) found
also that educational level accounted for
56 per cent of the total variance in the
demographic transition measured by fertility changes. Studies to identify the particular aspect of education and literacy that
triggers a fertility decline have shown that
high schoo] education tends to be more
fertility-depressing than vocational education (Safilios-Rothschild, 1969) and that
informal education, through mass media,
could be influential on fertility (Concepcion and Hendershot, 1969). Although
these studies have largely been inconsequential, improvement of the general education and literacy level still seems the
correct approach when combating high
population growth in LDC’s.

The level of calorie and protein content
has a fertility-inhibiting effect (this should
not be taken to mean the direct effect of
food on reproduction). The effect is not
due primarily to fecundity changes (as argued by de Castro, 1952, pp. 71-72, and
countered by Sax, 1955, pp. 166-67) but
to decisions made by individuals or

couples to curtail births. The causal relation of nutrition and diet to fertility must
be viewed in this context. In essence,
nutrition-diet is merely an indicator of the
level of economic development. A high

Socioeconomic Change and Fertility

45

level of economic development tends, indirectly through nutrition-diet, to induce
fertility restriction.

It has been said that to replenish the
large number of infant deaths, or to
merely survive, a population faced with
high infant mortality would require a high
fertility (United Nations, 1965, p. 6;
Notestein, 1945, pp. 39~40, 1950, p. 342).
Our study identifies such a relationship,
i.e., high infant mortality is strongly associated with, but not causally linked to,
high fertility both in LDC’s and the total
sample. This finding supports Preston’s
(1978) contention that infant mortality
cannot “explain” fertility; the relationship
is correlational, not causal. We found also
that the availability of health services
and calorie and protein content in LDC’s
do not affect infant mortality when education-literacy remains in the model.
When, however, education is removed as
a causal agent affecting infant mortality, both population per physician and
nutrition-diet become strong determinants
of infant mortality. Less population per
physician (i.e., better health care) and better nutrition-diet cause declines in infant
mortality. This is in consonance with
education-literacy being the common denominator affecting fertility and seems to
underscore Davis’ (1963) concept of a multiphasic response to population change.

Education-literacy, governmental attitudes toward family planning, population per physician, and nutrition-diet
infermediate between economic development and urbanization, and fertility. Economic development and _ urbanization
create changes in these intermediary social
variables, which in turn, reduce fertility.
Without education, the attitudes of governments toward family planning become
insignificant in determining fertility. The
direct effect of economic development on
fertility also becomes insignificant, but its
indirect effect, along with urbanization,

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

46 Chang

passes through nutrition-diet, stimulating
a fertility decline. This supports the theory
of demographic transition, which predicts
that fertility changes in response to
changes in socioeconomic conditions.

Since the indirect effect of economic development on fertility is clearly negative,
is it true also that the direct influence of
economic development stimulates reproduction? Our analysis, consistent with
past findings, shows that economic development does indeed cause fertility to
increase, although the magnitude of influence is small (insignificant in the total
sample). When education is dropped, the
direct effect becomes negative, but insignificant. This suggests that some LDC’s
that have recently made progress in economic development have shown a high
level of reproduction. This finding
strongly supports the observation that
most countries beginning economic development experience an upsurge in fertility
(Adelman, 1963; Heer, 1966; Weintraub,
1962; see also Habakkuk, 1965; Krause,
1958; Goldscheider, 1971).

This study tested and found support for
the general theory advanced by Heer
(1966, p. 423) that the direct effect of economic development is to increase fertility,
while the indirect effect of economic development is to create changes in intermediary variables, which, in turn, are
conducive to fertility control. We have
found that the indirect effect of economic
development is a much greater influence
than the direct effect over population
change. This finding provides empirical
support for the hypothesis that the indirect
effect of economic development can brake
rapid population growth in the world
today.

According to our analysis, attitudes of
governments toward population programs
are directly determined by the level of
economic development and educationliteracy. However, economic development

et al. Social Biology
directly creates a negative attitude toward
family planning while education-literacy,
reflecting positive influence of economic
development, creates a much stronger
positive attitude by governments toward
family planning. But our study fails to
show that governmental attitudes toward
family planning reduce the fertility level.
In fact, the influence is weakly positive.
Hauser (1962, pp. 464-65) argues that
changes in fertility behavior must be carried out in the context of change in the
social order rather than through merely
changing attitudes, values, or motivations. This same idea is borne out in the
statement that “measurable progress (of
family planning) so far relates more to attitude and policy than to action and
achievement” (Kirk and Nortman, 1973,
p. 254). From a social change viewpoint,
Davis (1973) has maintained that change
in reproductive behavior must be preceded by social change. The failure of the
LDC’s to lower their fertility quickly has
been one of slow social change, in which
case family planning helps little. Although
our findings are consistent with those reported by other researchers, we feel that
crude definition of governmental attitude
allows us to treat the results only as very
tentative.

The failure of this study to arrive at a
causal model for the MDC’s is somewhat
expected. Some historical studies of the
European experience have used variables
such as proportion married, total fertility,
infant mortality, urbanization, industrialization, and literacy and could not
supply evidence to support the transition
theory and its implied threshold hypothesis (Van de Walle and Knodel, 1967, pp.
52—53). Coale (1969, p. 18), in explaining
his results from the study of European
societies, pointed out that, even with such
well-reported factors as the decline in mortality, the rising cost and diminished advantages of children, higher status of

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 1

women, religious changes and differences,
and the development of a secular attitude,
no consistent patterns of variations were
found. More recently, Beaver (1975, p.
145), in his well-designed study, suggests
that the theory of the demographic transition is not synonymous with the European
experience, and that the European evidence suggests that other variables, not
part of transition theory, were at work.
More research obviously is needed to examine the effect of socioeconomic changes
on fertility in order to strengthen and modify the theory of demographic transition.

CONCLUSIONS

The theory of the demographic transition provides a useful framework within
which to examine the cause and effect relationships of socioeconomic and demographic changes to human reproduction.
Because the study concentrates on a short
span of time, it does not attempt to examine the stages of change specified by the
theory. On the basis of current world conditions, we proceeded to analyze how socioeconomic changes at one point in time
brought about changes in reproductive
behavior several years later. This study’s
findings have theoretical implications for
scholars and researchers and policy implications for decision-makers. We agree
with Burch (1975) and Goldberg (1975)
that theories of fertility should offer insight and guidance to fertility control.

The improvement of education-literacy
as a result of development is the most effective factor in changing the demographic
processes of fertility and infant mortality.
This means that, during a country’s development, improvement in the educational
and literacy levels should be given early
and special emphasis if fertility is to be
controlled. Miro and Mertens (1968) found
evidence suggesting that the completed
primary level of schooling creates the
largest decline in fertility, while Holsinger

Socioeconomic Change and Fertility

 

47

and Kasarda (1976) urge that governments
of those LDC’s wishing lower fertility
rates should make a special effort, along
with other measures, to provide opportunities for women to attend school. Our
study seems to have reinforced both contentions in that our composite index of
education and literacy takes into account
not only literacy in general, but also primary school education and female enrollment in secondary education. Economic
development is directly related to an increase in fertility, but indirectly promotes
fertility decline. Infant mortality does not
bear a causal effect on fertility, but displays a strong association with fertility.

Empirically, the LDC’s strongly support the theory of the demographic transition, in which the basic tenets state that
socioeconomic development and improved
survivorship of infants and children leads,
after a time lag, to a fertility decline (Beaver, 1975, p. 147). A theoretical question,
however, must be asked as to how inclusive the theory is. In this respect we agree
with Beaver (1975, p. 16) that the theory
of demographic transition is not a global
theory of human fertility. The conflicting
and inconsistent findings of past research
seem to mean that the theory itself is not
meant to predict similar fertility trends for
all regions of the world, but only that the
predicted relationships between the independent variables in the theory (urbanization, the rising level of education, and the
improved level of living) and the dependent variable (fertility), will hold true (Beaver, 1975, p. 12). Even as Beaver (1975,
p. 151) notes, this does not refute the
theory itself but emphasizes the need to
constantly expand and modify the theory
to include regions and phenomena which
themselves change over time. The problem, therefore, is one of theoretical inadequacies rather than the empirical refutation of the theory.

Beaver himself implies major differ 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

48 Chang et al.

ences in causes of fertility given various
cultural contexts, contexts measurable, for
example, in terms of geographic continents An analysis is now underway to test

Social Biology

these implications and investigate the stability of this study’s fertility model under
varying cultural contexts The results will
be presented in a future paper

REFERENCES

ADELMAN, IRMA 1963 An econometric analysis of
population growth Amer Econ Rev 53 314339

ADELMAN, IRMA, and CYNTHIA TAFT Morris
1966 A quantitative study of social and political
determinants of fertihty Econ Develop Cult
Chg 14 129-157

AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
1973a Economic growth trends July and August
Statistics and Reports Division AI D , Washington, DC

1973b Selected economic data for the less

developed countries Statistics and Reports Divi
sion AID, Washington, DC

1973c Economic data books December
AID, Washington, DC

AMERICAN UNIVERSITIES FIELD STAFF 1972 Population perspective 1971 Freeman, Cooper, &
Co , San Francisco

BEAVER, STEVEN E 1975 Demographic transition
theory remterpreted DC Heath and Co,
Lexington, Mass

BECKER, GARY S 1960 An economic analysis of
fertility, pp 209-231 Jn Demographic and economic change in developing countries A Conference of the Universitres—Nattonal Bureau Committee for Economic Research Princeton Univ
Press, Princeton, N J

BENGOA, J] M 1974 The problem of malnutntion
WHO Chronicle 28 3-7

BERG, BENJAMIN 1973 Nutrition and national development, pp 49-69 Jn Alan Berg, Nevin S
Scrimshaw, and David L Call (eds ), Nutrition,
national development and planning The MIT
Press, Cambridge, Mass

BLACKER, C P 1947 Stages in population growth
Eugen Rev 39 88-102

BoGuE, DONALD 1969 Principles of demography
Wiley, New York

BurcH, THOMAS 1975 Theories of fertility as
guides to population policy Soc Force 54 126143

CARLSSON, GOSTA 1966 The decline of fertility
Innovations or adjustment process Pop Stud
20(2) 149-174

CHANDRASEKHAR, S_ 1972 Infant mortality, population growth and family planning Univ of North
Carolina Press, Chapel Hall

COALE, ANSLEY 1969 The dechne of fertuhty m
Europe from the French Revolution to World
War II, pp 3-19 In S J Behrman, Leshe Corsa,
Jr , and Ronald Freedman (eds), Fertility and
family planning A world view Univ of Michigan
Press, Ann Arbor

CoALE, ANSLEY, and EpGAR M Hoover 1958
Population growth and economic development in
low mcome countries Princeton Univ Press,
Princeton, N J

CONCEPCION, MERCEDES B , and GERRY E HENDERSHOT 1969 Factors associated with marned
women’s ideal famiy size and approval of family

 

 

planning University of the Phillipines, Population
Institute, Quezon

DAVIS, KINGSLEY 1949 Human society Macmillan, New York

1963 The theory of change and response in

modern demographic history Pop Index

29 345-366

1969 World urbanization 1950-1970 Vol
ume 1 Basic data for cities, countries and regions

Population Monograph Series, No 4 University

of California, Berkeley

1973 Population policy Will current programs succeed? Pp 352-376 In Michael Mickhin
(ed }, Population, environment, and social orgamization Current issues in human ecology The Dryden Press, Hinsdale, Iil

DE CASTRO, JOSE 1952 The geography of hunger
Little Brown, Boston

DUNCAN, OTIS DUDLEY 1966 Path analysis Sociological examples Amer J Sociol 72 1-16

EASTERLIN, RICHARD 1962 The American baby
boom in historical perspective Occasional Paper
79, National Bureau of Economic Research

EKANEM, ITAI 1972 A further note on the relation
between economic development and fertility Demography 9 383-398

ELDRIDGE, Hope T 1952 Population growth and
economic development Land Econ 28 1-9

EuROPA 1973 The Europa yearbook A world survey New York

FREEDMAN, RONALD, GERHARD BAUMERT, and
MARTIN BOLTE 1959 Expected family size and
family size values in West Germany Pop Stud
13 136-150

FREEDMAN, RONALD, and JOHN TAKESHITA 1969
Family planning in Taiwan Princeton Univ
Press, Princeton, N J

FRIEDLANDER, STANLEY, and Morris SILVER
1967 A quantitative study of the determinants of
fertility behavior Demography 4 30-70

GAETE-DaRBO, ADOLFO 1964 Appraisal of vital
Statistics in Latin America Milbank Mem Fund
Quart 42 86-103

GALBRAITH, VIRGINIA L, and Dorotuy S
THOMAS 1941 Birth rates and the interwar business cycles J Amer Stat Assoc 36 84-106

GOLDBERG, DAVID 1975 Socioeconomic theory and
differential fertslity The case of LDC’s Soc Forc
54 34-106

GOLDSCHEIDER, CALVIN 1971 Population, modernization, and social structure Little, Brown and
Co , Boston

HABAKKUK, H J 1965 Enghsh population in the
eighteenth century, pp 269-284 In D V Glass
and D_ Eversley (eds ), Population in history
Aldine-Atherton, Chicago

HARRINGTON, JUDITH 1971 The effect of high mnfant and childhood mortality on fertihty The West
African case Conc Demog 3 22-35

HAUSER, PHILIP M 1962 On design for experyment
and research in fertility control, pp 463-474 In

 

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 1

Clyde Kiser (eds.), Research in family planning.
Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J.

HEER, Davip M. 1966. Economic development and
fertility. Demography 3:423-444.

HEER, Davip M., and DEAN O. SMITH. 1968. Mortality level, desired family size and population increase. Demography 5:104~121.

HOLSINGER, DONALD B., and JOHN D. KASARDA.
1976. Education and human fertility: Sociological
perspectives, pp. 154-181. In Ronald G. Ridker
(eds.), Population and development: The search
for selective interventions. The Johns Hopkins
Univ. Press, Baltimore.

INSTITUTO INTERAMERICANO DE ESTADISTICA.
1972. America en cifras, 1972. Organization De
Los Estados Americanos, Washington, D.C.

JAFFE, A. J. 1959. People, jobs and economic development. The Free Press of Glencoe, Glencoe, Mil.

JANOWITZ, BARBARA S. 1971. An empirical study of
the effects of socioeconomic development on fertility rates. Demography 8:319-—329.

KAMMEYER, KENNETH C. W. 1975. A_ reexamination of some recent criticisms of transition
theory, pp. 156-168. Zn Kenneth C. W. Kammeyer (ed.), Population studies: Selected essays
and research. 2nd ed. Rand McNally College Publishing Co., Chicago.

KirK, DUDLEY. 1942. The relation of employment
levels to births in Germany. Milbank Mem. Fund
Quart. 28:126-138.

KIRK, DUDLEY, and DorRoTHY NORTMAN. 1973.
Population policies in developing countries, pp.
240-258. In Michael Micklin (ed.), Population,
environment, and social organization: Current issues in human ecology. The Dryden Press,
Hinsdale, Il.

KRAUSE, J. T. 1958. Changes in English fertility and
mortality, 1781-1850. Econ. Hist. Rev. 11:52-70.

KusUKAWA, AKIRA. 1967. Social and economic fac~
tors in mortality in developing countries, pp.
337-341. In Proceedings of the World Population
Conference, Belgrade, August 30-Sept. 10, 1965.
Volume II: Selected Papers and Summaries.
United Nations, New York.

KUZNETS, SIMON. 1969. Economic aspects of fertility trends in the less developed countries, pp.
157-179. In S. J. Behrman, Leslie Corsa, Jr., and
Ronald Freedman (eds.), Fertility and family
planning: A world view. Univ. of Michigan Press,
Ann Arbor.

LOWENTHAL, NORMAN H., and ABRAHAM §&,
Davip. 1972. Social and economic correlates of
family fertility: An updated survey of the evidence.
Research Triangle Institute, Research Triangle
Park, N.C,

MacurA, MILOs. 1961. The influence of the definition of urban place on the size of urban population,
pp. 21-31. In Jack P. Gibbs (ed.), Urban research
methods. Van Nostrand, New York.

MASON, KAREN O., ABRAHAM S. Davin, Eva K.
GERSTEL, QUENTIN W. LINDSEY, and MICHAEL
V. E. RULISON. 1971. Social and economic correlates of family fertility: A survey of the evidence.
Research Triangle Institute, Research Triangle
Park, N.C.

McIntosH, WILLIAM ALEXANDER. 1975. Social indicators for the monitoring of the nutritional aspects of societal well-being. Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation. Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa.

Mrro, CARMEN A., and WALTER MERTENS. 1968.

Socioeconomic Change and Fertility

 

 

49

Influences affecting fertility in urban and rural
Latin America. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart.
46:89~117.

NAM, CHARLES B. (ed.). 1968. Population and society. Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston.

NAMBOODIRI, N. KRISHNAN. 1975. Prologue. Soc.
Forc. 54:2-6.

NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES. STUDY ComMITTEE OF THE OFFICE OF THE FOREIGN SECRETARY. 1971. Rapid population growth: Consequences and policy implications. Johns Hopkins
Press, Baltimore.

NOTESTEIN, FRANK. 1945. Population—The long
view, pp. 36-57. In Theodore W. Schultz (ed.),
Food for the world. Univ. of Chicago Press,
Chicago.

. 1950. The population of the world in the
year 2,000. J. Amer. Stat. Assoc. 45:335-345.
OGBURN, W. F. 1927. Social change with respect to

culture and original nature. Viking, New York.

OcBUuRN, W. F., and DoroTHY S. THOMAs. 1922.
The influence of the business cycle on certain social
conditions. J. Amer. Stat. Assoc. 18:324~—340.

PENDLETON, BRIAN F. 1976. A conceptual model for
the identification, organization, and measure of
influence of fertility policies and programs. Soc.
Biol. 23:326-340.

. 1978. An historical description and analysis
of pronatalist policies in Italy, Germany and Sweden. Policy Sci. 9:45-—70.

PETERSEN, WILLIAM. 1975. Population. Macmillan,
New York.

POPULATION REFERENCE BUREAU. 1973. World
population data sheet: 1973. Population Reference
Bureau, New York.

PRESTON, SAMUEL H. (Ed.). 1978. The effects of
infant and child mortality on fertility. Academic
Press, New York.

Ricu, WILLIAM. 1973. Smaller families through social and economic progress. Monograph No. 7.
Overseas Development Council, Washington,
D.C.

RILEY, JEANNE C. 1965. Recent natality trends in
underdeveloped countries, pp. 143-173. In Minde] C. Sheps and Jeanne C. Riley (eds.), Public
health and population change: Current research
issues. Univ. of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh.

RYDER, NORMAN R. 1957. The conceptualization of
the transition in fertility, pp. 91-96. In Cold
Spring Harbor symposia on quantitative biology.
Long Island Biological Association, Cold Spring
Harbor, New York.

SAFILIOS-ROTHSCHILD, CONSTANTINA. 1969. Sociopsychological factors affecting fertility in
urban Greece: A preliminary report. J. Marr.
Fam. 31:595-—600.

SAX, KarRL. 1955. Standing room only. Beacon
Press, Boston.

SCHULTZ, T. PAUL. 1971. Evaluation of population
policies: A framework for analysis and its application to Taiwan’s family planning program. Rand
Corporation, Santa Monica, Calif.

SHANNON, LYLE W. 1957. Underdeveloped areas.
Harper and Row, New York.

SJOBERG, GIDEON, and ANDRE F. SJOBERG. 1960.
Why cities have developed spread, and declined,
pp. 34-43. In Sandor Halebsky (ed.), The sociology of the city. Charles Scribner’s Sons, New
York.

SMELSER, NEIL J. 1973. Toward a theory of mod
 

 

  

  
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

50 Chang et al.

ernization, pp. 268-284. In Amitai Etzioni and
Eva Etzioni-Halevy, Social change. 2nd ed. Basic
Books, New York.

SPENGLER, JOSEPH J. 1938. France faces depopulation. Duke Univ. Press, Durham, N.C

Stycos, J. MAYONE. 1967. Education and fertility in
Puerto Rico. Proceedings of the World Population
Conference, 1965. United Nations, New York.

TAYLOR, CHARLES L., and MICHAEL C. HuDSON.
1972. World handbook of political and social indicators. 2nd ed. Yale Univ. Press, New Haven.

TEITELBAUM, MICHAEL S. 1974. Population and
development: Is a consensus possible. For. Affairs
(July):742—-760.

THOMPSON, WARREN S. 1929. Population. Amer. J.
Social. 34:959-975.

. 1944, Plenty of People. The Jacques Cattell
Press, Lancaster, Pa.

TURNHAM, DAvip. 1971. The employment problem
in less developed countries: A review of the evidence. Development Center Studies, Employment
Series No. 1. Development Center of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris.

UNITED NATIONS. 1963. Population bulletin of the
United Nations. No. 6, 1962 (with special reference to the situation and recent trends of mortality
in the world). United Nations, New York.

. 1965. Population bulletin of the United Na
tions. No. 7, 1963 (with special reference to condi
tions and trends of fertility in the world). United

Nations, New York.

. 1967. Statistical yearbook. 1966. United Na
tions, New York.

. 1971. Monthly bulletin of statistics (April).

Vol. 25:xxx-xxxiv.

. 1972a. Measures, policies and programmes

affecting fertility, with particular reference to na
tional family planning programmes. Population

Studies No. 51. United Nations, New York.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Social Biology

 

. 19726. Statistical yearbook. 1971. United

Nations, New York.

. 1972c. World energy supplies, 1968-1971.

Statistical Papers, Series J, No. 16. United Na
tions, New York.

. 1972d, Yearbook of international labor

statistics: 1971. United Nations, New York.

. 1973. Demographic yearbook: 1972. United

Nations, New York.

. 1974. Demographic yearbook: 1973. United
Nations, New York.

U.S. BUREAU OF THE CENSUS. 1971. The methods
and materials of demography. By Henry S.
Shryock, Jacob S. Siegel, and Associates. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

. 1974. Research Document Number 6, Preliminary Draft (January), Bureau of the Census.
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE. 1973. Overseas
business reports. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C.

VAN DE WALLE, E. and J. KNODEL. 1967. Demographic transition and fertility decline: The European case, pp. 47—55. In The international union
for the scientific study of population. Contributed
papers. Sydney, Australia.

WEINTRAUB, ROBERT. 1962. The birth rate and economic development: An empirical study. Econometrica 40:812-817.

WORLD BANK. 1973. World Bank atlas. World
Bank, New York.

. n.d. Country data. Mimeograph. World
Bank, New York.

YAUKEY, DAVID. 1962. Differential fertility in Lebanon, pp. 125-139. In Clyde V. Kiser (ed.), Research in family planning. Princeton Univ. Press,
Princeton, N.J.

YuLe, G. U. 1906. On the changes in the marriage
and birth rates in England and Wales during the
past half century with an inquiry as to their probable causes. J. Roy. Stat. Soc. 69:88-132.

 

 

 

 

 

Journal Paper No. J-9190 of the lowa Agriculture and Home Economics Experiment Station, Ames, Iowa.

Projects No. 1837 and 2146.

 
