Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Marketable licenses for babies: Boulding's
proposal revisited

David M. Heer

To cite this article: David M. Heer (1975) Marketable licenses for babies: Boulding's proposal
revisited, Social Biology, 22:1, 1-16, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1975.9988142

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1975.9988142

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Fone | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 3
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 1 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Marketable Licenses for Babies:
Boulding’s Proposal Revisited

David M. Heer

Population Research Laboratory
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California

In 1964, the well-known economist Kenneth Boulding suggested a new means of
fertility control: marketable licenses for
babies (Boulding, 1964). Boulding realized
his idea would not be taken seriously by
the general public. He therefore devoted
only two short paragraphs to its exposition.
Events during the past decade, including
especially the 1974 energy crisis, have since
forced the American people into much more
direct confrontation with the problems
posed by continual population increase.

Although the actual crisis caused by the
Arab embargo on petroleum exports to the
United States has been ended, the nation
is faced with the long-term prospect that
energy prices will remain far above their
pre-1974 levels and that even at the new
higher prices domestic energy supplies will
be considerably less than domestic demand.
Moreover, at the same time as the price of
energy has increased dramatically, so has
the price of our major food crops, partly,
of course, as a direct result of the rise in
the price of the former, since American agriculture uses extremely large amounts of
inanimate energy per acre of crop production (Brown, 1974). The higher the rate of
America’s future population growth, the
more serious the problems of adequate en
 

ergy and resources will become. Therefore,
what was unthinkable in 1964 may, in the
future, appear to many persons as common
sense.

Accordingly, I wish to present a rather
thorough treatment of the Boulding proposal which will include: (1) discussion of
the very crucial matter of enforcement,
which Boulding never mentioned; (2) two
suggestions for modifying his basic scheme;
(3) a consideration of some other matters
he either did not treat or treated with less
than proper thoroughness; and (4) a comparison of his proposal with alternative policies aimed at regulating the quantity and
quality of the human population.

I hold no firm belief in my own mind
that a proposal as seemingly radical as this
one will ever be deemed necessary in the
United States. On the other hand, the Commission on Population Growth and the
American Future concluded in 1972 “that
no substantial benefits would result from
continued growth of the nation’s population,” “that the stabilization of our population would contribute significantly to the
nation’s ability to solve its problems,” and
“that the nation [should] welcome and
plan for a stabilized population” (Commission on Population Growth and the AmerDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

2 Heer

ican Future, 1972, p. 110). A possible implication from these remarks of the Commission is that the United States may in
the not too distant future seriously debate
whether a policy of precise control of future population growth is necessary and desirable. If and when such a moment comes,
I feel strongly that professionals in the
field of population studies should be able
to prepare the ground for intelligent decision-making through having themselves a
thorough understanding of the probable
consequences of the various possible mechanisms of securing that control.

Boulding’s original proposal (Boulding,
1964, pp. 135-136) was as follows:

I have only one positive suggestion to
make, a proposal which now seems so farfetched that I find it creates only amusement when I propose it. I think in all seriousness, however, that a system of marketable licenses to have children is the only one
which will combine the minimum of social
control necessary to the solution to this
problem with a maximum of individual liberty and ethical choice. Each girl on approaching maturity would be presented with
a certificate which will entitle its owner to
have, say, 2.2 children, or whatever number
would ensure a reproductive rate of one.
The unit of these certificates might be the
“deci-child,” and accumulation of ten of
these units by purchase, inheritance, or gift
would permit a woman in maturity to have
one legal child. We would then set up a
market in these units in which the rich and
the philoprogenitive would purchase them
from the poor, the nuns, the maiden aunts,
and so on. The men perhaps could be left
out of these arrangements, as it is only the
fertility of women which is strictly relevant
to population control. However, it may be
found socially desirable to have them in the
plan, in which case all children both male
and female would receive, say, eleven or
twelve deci-child certificates at birth or at
maturity, and a woman could then accumulate these through marriage.

This plan would have the additional advantage of developing a long-run tendency
toward equality in income, for the rich
would have many children and become poor
and the poor would have few children and
become rich. The price of the certificate
would of course reflect the general desire in

 

Social Biology

a society to have children. Where the desire
is very high the price would be bid up;
where it was low the price would also be
low. Perhaps the ideal situation would be
found when the price was naturally zero, in
which case those who wanted children would
have them without extra cost. If the price
were very high the system would probably
have to be supplemented by some sort of
grants to enable the deserving but impecunious to have children, while cutting off the
desires of the less deserving through taxation. The sheer unfamiliarity of a scheme of
this kind makes it seem absurd at the moment. The fact that it seems absurd, however, is merely a reflection of the total unwillingness of mankind to face up to what
is perhaps its most serious Jong-run problem.

THE PROBLEM OF ENFORCEMENT

Let me first take up the very important
matter of enforcement which Boulding
never considered. Note that he wished to
combine the minimum of social control
necessary to solve the problem of a toohigh birth rate with the maximum of individual liberty. However, he failed to consider any means either of preventing the
existence of unlicensed children or of keeping their number at a tolerable level. Our
first task, therefore is to consider what
mechanisms would guarantee that the number of unlicensed children not be unacceptably high.

First of all, it should be emphasized that
the legalization of abortion in the United
States, secured by Supreme Court decision
in 1973, makes the problem of enforcement
much easier than it would have been otherwise, since abortion provides a mechanism
for prior elimination of many potential unlicensed babies. (On the other hand, of
course, many women may refuse to make
use of abortion on moral grounds.) Let us
now consider several possible types of enforcement mechanisms all of which assume
the continued legalization of abortion.

At one extreme, one could rely simply
on the force of public opinion to create
voluntary compliance and provide no for
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 22, No. 1

mal mechanism to deter individuals who
give birth without surrendering to the government the requisite number of child license units. In my opinion, parental desire
to choose family size is too strong to make
this a viable option. At the other extreme,
one could institute a very direct means of
eliminating unlicensed babies—immediately putting them to death. However, such
a drastic proposal would, no doubt, be
deemed unacceptable on moral or humanitarian grounds. Moreover, it would literally constitute an overkill, since it would
be desirable to have a certain number of
unlicensed babies for adoption by parents
unable to have children of their own. This
would suggest the possibility of putting to
death only those unlicensed children who
cannot be adopted. But this idea would
still be considered unacceptable on moral
grounds.

What less drastic means of securing
compliance are then available? Edgar
Chasteen has suggested the idea of a drug
administered at puberty and implemented
in a time capsule under the skin so that it
would produce long-term sterility reversible only through administration of another
drug (Chasteen, 1970). The idea is feasible only if such a contraception can be developed. If the scheme for licensing babies
were to be put into effect in the absence of
such a contraceptive, some other means of
enforcement would be necessary. It would
of course be currently quite feasible surgically to sterilize every woman immediately
after giving birth to an unlicensed baby.
This policy has been advocated by Kingsley Davis (1973) and might prove a suitable deterrent to some women. However,
many others might not be influenced at all.
Consider a woman who very much wants a
third child, feels she cannot afford to purchase the requisite number of license units,
and yet definitely wants no more than
three children. Obviously for such a woman

Marketable Licenses for Babies 3

the prospect of surgical sterilization would
have little or no deterrent effect.

In many respects, the least disadvantageous means of ensuring compliance at the
present time would be a system in which
all unlicensed babies were immediately relinquished by their mothers and placed under governmental custody. A presupposition for the effectiveness of such a plan is
the presumption that most pregnant women
would rather seek an abortion than suffer
the substantial emotional pain of relinquishing their baby with the prospect of
never seeing it again. Most persons would
probably agree with Kingley Davis (1973)
that as many unlicensed babies as possible
should then be handed over for adoption
by childless couples—couples who would in
return surrender the appropriate number
of child license units to the government.

Obviously, some provision would have to
be made for the possibility that not all unlicensed babies could be adopted. These
babies would have to be brought up in
foster families or in children’s homes. In
order to reduce the number of children
brought up outside of a normal family situation, it might be considered appropriate
to combine the rule of state custody for all
unlicensed children with -the regulation
that all mothers of unlicensed babies must
be sterilized. I said earlier that sterilization
would probably not have much effect in itself. However, it would eliminate the possibility that a woman would ever bear more
than one unlicensed baby.

In summary, the Boulding proposal is
probably not feasible unless some sanctions
exist to deter, prevent, or eliminate unlicensed babies. The development of a longterm contraceptive implant would be of
very significant aid in this regard. Only if
such an implant were available could the
government legislate, as Chasteen has suggested, that all females accept such implants at puberty and that the reversal of
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

4 Heer

the implant’s sterilizing effect be obtainable only upon surrender of a childbearing
license. With this type of legislation, unlicensed babies would be possible only if the
implant were to be illegally removed.
Moreover, even assuming use of the implant was voluntary and not compulsory,
its availability would tend to shift the decision-making focus away from the question “Should I make the effort to use a
contraceptive to avoid conception?” to the
question “Should I make the effort to give
up my contraceptive in order to have a
baby?” Accordingly, there is no doubt that
the number of unlicensed babies would be
fewer than if no such implant were available; and, assuming the existence of such
a contraceptive, quite possibly all unlicensed babies could be adopted by naturally childless couples.

On the other hand, in the absence of
such an implant, it is much more likely
that the number of unlicensed babies would
exceed the demand for them by naturally
childless persons and that some children
would have to be raised outside of a normal family situation. Without actual experimentation, it is impossible to know how
many such children there would be. It is
possible that the number of such children
would be unacceptably large both from the
standpoint of the value that all children
deserve to be brought up by loving parental figures and also from the standpoint of
the goal of fertility control.

TWO SUGGESTIONS FOR
MODIFICATION

If it is assumed that there would be
more unlicensed babies than the number
requisite to provide the involuntarily childless couples with an average of about two
children, what further mechanism would be
available to reduce the average number of
children to replacement level? Boulding’s
proposal was noteworthy for the fact that

Social Biology

he proposed that child licenses be marketable so that couples who did not wish to
have the normative number of children
would receive a monetary award and those
who wished to have more than the normative number would have to pay for this
privilege. Let us now entertain the possibility of extending the concept of marketability so that licenses may also be bought
by the government. We now have a mechanism by which we can assure that, on the
average, individuals have no more children
than necessary for their own replacement.
All the government has to do is to purchase
at the market price a number of baby licenses equal in number to the excess of unlicensed babies.

Thus, we see one definite advantage to
be gained by allowing the government to
purchase licenses. But the possibility that
the government could purchase child licenses is useful in another and most important fashion. It would give the government
extensive power to make substantial annual adjustment in the number of births
and thereby regulate extensively and rather
precisely the rate of population increase.
In contrast, the original Boulding proposal
guarantees only that fertility will vary narrowly around replacement level and cannot
guarantee that the rate of natural increase
(the crude birth rate minus the crude death
rate) will be nil nor, @ fortiori, can it provide for zero population growth (which
would be obtainable with a zero rate of
natural increase only provided there was
also no net immigration from abroad).

The reason why an immediate end to
natural increase in the United States population is unattainable despite fertility no
higher than replacement level is related to
the fact that variation in the crude birth
and death rates can exist despite the fact
that the cohort net reproduction rate remains constant. The cohort net reproduction rate can be defined separately for
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. 1

either females or for males. For females,
it is the average number of female babies
born over a life span to the original number of women born in a given year. For
males, it is the average number of male
babies born over a life span to the original
number of a birth cohort of males.

The Boulding proposal attempts to guarantee that the cohort net reproduction rate
either for females or for males will not exceed a figure close to one. Nevertheless, a
cohort net reproduction rate of one by no
means guarantees that the birth rate will
equal the death rate, that the rate of natural increase will be nil, or that zero population growth will be achieved. The rate
of natural increase will not be zero when
the cohort net reproduction rate is one unless the population is in a stable state.

A stable population is defined for a
closed population (i.e., one in which there
is neither immigration from abroad nor
emigration to other nations) of a given sex
as the fixed population age distribution
which will eventually result if there are no
changes in age-specific death rates or agespecific rates of producing same-sex babies.
It will also be true that eventually a close
approximation to a stable population will
be reached whenever the cohort net reproduction rate remains constantly at one for
a sufficiently long period. But the crucial
point is that a long time must elapse (from
75 to 100 years) after the date the cohort
net reproduction rate has reached one and
before the stable population is approached.
In this interim, for any population which
has previously experienced net population
growth, the crude death rate will continue
to be considerably Jower than it would be
if a stable population had already been attained and the crude birth rate somewhat
larger. These results will obtain because of
the younger average age of the actual population compared to the stable. As a consequence, the rate of population increase

 

Marketable Licenses for Babies 5

(barring net out-migration) will remain
fairly substantial for a long time period
after the cohort net reproduction rate has
remained constant at one.

Detailed studies of the amount of population growth to be expected after the net
reproduction rate is reduced to a constant
value of one and before a stable population
is reached have been published by the U.S.
Bureau of the Census (1972) and by
Frejka (1973). Each of these studies is
concerned not with the cohort net reproduction rate but with the period reproductive rate (defined for females as the average number of female babies which would
be born to the original number of women
in an artificial cohort exposed to the agespecific death rates and the age-specific female birth rates of a given period, usually
a single year). However, the results of their
computation should not differ very much
from.the results of calculations making use
of the cohort net reproduction rate.

Column 1 of Table 1 shows Frejka’s calculation of population growth for the
United States assuming the period net reproduction rate reaches a figure of 1.0 in
1970-75 and remains at that figure forever afterwards, and also assuming that
there is henceforth no net immigration into
or out of the United States. According to
his projection, population growth will continue to be substantial for many decades
and cessation of population growth does not
occur until after 2050. Total population of
the United States rises from 206 million in
1970 to 280 million in the year 2100, for a
total increase of 36 per cent.

It is possible that a growing shortage of
energy and other natural resources will
make a total population growth of 36 per
cent (or more) in the United States appear
to be excessively large and hence politically
unacceptable. A harbinger in this regard
may be the change in the goals advocated
by ZPG. Its original goal was to guarantee
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

OO

Heer

Social Biology

TABLE 1

PRoJEcTiIons OF ToTAL PorpvLATION IN Mrtrions AnD oF INpIcEs oF Popuration S1zE
(1970 EquALS 100): Untrep States, 1970-2100

N.R.R. = 1.0 in 1970-75

N.R.R. = 0.9 in 1970-75

N.R.R. == 0.9 in 1970-75 and 1.0 in 1985-1990

 

Year Population Index Population Index Population Index
1970 icc cece wee c ee eee 205.7 100 205.7 100 205.7 100
TO8O co.cc ccc w ccc w cence 220.7 107 217.4 106 217.4 106
1990 scscsanwemanwemetee 237.5 115 230.3 112 232.2 113
2000 anaes cecuens eewewen 250.4 122 238.3 116 243.6 118
2020 voc ceesssseseguuwes 272.6 133 246.8 120 | 261.6 127
2050 w.eds ne caees ca ewan 279.2 136 227.0 110 264.2 128
2100 aseys cayenne paacwne 279.8 136 186.7 91 264.2 128

Source: Tomas Frejka, 1973.

that the average American had no more
children than was necessary for replacement. Thus, their original emphasis was on
the necessity for an average two-child fam~
ily. In September, 1973, ZPG revised its
statement of goals to state that it believes
the current population of the United States
to be in excess of “the optimum level for
the continued well-being of its citizens.”
Accordingly, ZPG now advocates the end
to U.S. population growth by 1990 and a
reduction in U.S. population size thereafter
(Zero Population Growth National Reporter, 1973, p. 2). Also noteworthy in this
regard are the writings of A. E. Keir Nash,
a political scientist with a special interest
in population policy who was a Director of
Research for the Commission on Population Growth and the American Future.
Nash (1972) has openly questioned the
“assumption that no thinkable population
policy could seek a growth rate lower than
O nor an NRR lower than 1.”

Let us now assume that the government
purchases from individuals approximately
one-tenth of all of the licenses so that individuals hold only enough licenses to ensure a period net reproduction rate of 0.9.
The consequences with respect to population growth have already been computed
by Frejka and are shown in Column 2 of
Table 1. By the year 2020, total U.S. pop
ulation would be 247 million as compared
with a figure of 273 million if the net reproduction rate had remained at 1.0. However, the original 1970 population would
not be reached again until after 2070.
Frejka also has made some calculations
more germane to the goals now enunciated
by ZPG. He states that to achieve immediate zero population growth would require
a period net reproduction rate of approximately 0.5 for about twenty years. If the
government were willing to pay the requiSite market price (and we cannot now be
sure whether it would be high or low), it
could purchase sufficient child licenses to
achieve immediate ZPG.

I should now like to bring up another
possibility not considered by Boulding in
his original proposal. The marketable license scheme might be modified to allow
for the possibility that individuals, until
they reached age 35, could loan their license units to the government and receive
interest during such time as their license
units were on loan to the government. Let
us assume for sake of argument that an individual is given license units at age 18 for
one or two children (depending on whether
licenses were given to women alone or to
both men and women). If this person did
not wish to have a child until age 25, she
(or he) could loan all of the license units
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 22, No. 1

possessed by her (or him) to the government and receive some set amount of interest each year. In this way, early childbearing would be discouraged, resulting in
a rise in the mean age of motherhood. A
permanent rise in the mean age of motherhood for birth cohorts would also have a
not insubstantial effect on the total amount
of population increase in the United States.

Let us again refer to calculations of
Frejka. He projects future population
growth in the United States assuming as
usual no net immigration from abroad and
presuming a period net reproduction rate
of 0.9 beginning in 1970-75 and changing
to a period net reproduction rate of 1.0 beginning in 1985-90. He designs this projection to measure the effect of a permanent rise in the mean age at motherhood
of birth cohorts. Such a change would involve a temporary decline in the value of
the period net reproduction rate. Frejka’s
calculations show a final population of 264
million attained by the year 2050, representing a population increase of 28 per
cent. This last figure may be compared
with the 36 per cent increase obtained
without a temporary decline in the period
net reproduction rate.

OTHER CONSIDERATIONS WITH RESPECT
TO BOULDING’S PROPOSAL

Let us now consider several matters
which Boulding either failed to consider or
considered without sufficient attention to
all possible consequences.

We may first note that Boulding does
not indicate exactly the age at which licenses to have babies will first be granted.
This is an important matter, since we have
seen that future population growth in the
United States will depend somewhat on the
mean age at motherhood. Obviously, if no
woman were granted a license to have a
baby before age 25, total future population
growth could be somewhat reduced. How
 

Marketable Licenses for Babies 7

ever, such an advanced age for licensing
might be seen to infringe upon the rights of
many women to have children when they
wanted and as such might be seen as unjustified coercion.

On the other hand, there are also reasons to oppose a policy of granting licenses
to individuals at puberty. Teen-age childbearing has been shown to be associated
with a multitude of adverse health and social consequences not only for young mothers but for their children as well. The best
summary of these associations is found in
an article published by Menken (1972).
Her article reveals that the infant mortality rate for white babies born to mothers
under 15 years of age in 1960 was 2.2
times the rate for white babies born to
mothers aged 20 to 24; for babies born to
mothers 15 to 19 years of age, the rate was
1.3 times that for babies born to mothers
aged 20 to 24. Moreover, a much higher
proportion of babies born to teen-agers are
of low birth weight and presumably also
premature. Infants of low birth weight
have also been shown to have greater
chance of epilepsy, cerebral palsy, mental
retardation, deafness, blindness, and poor
motor development.

None of these adverse conditions associated with teen-age childbearing can be considered as entirely caused by teen-age
childbearing per se. Some part of the association is undoubtedly due to the social
conditions involved in teen-age childbearing, such as the frequent lack of prenatal
care and the high proportion of out-of-wedlock births. Nevertheless, there is a considerable consensus that the physical and
social immaturity of the early teen-age
mother does cause considerable problems
both for herself and for her child.

Accordingly, a reasonable compromise
between the conflicting values of preserving individual freedoms and reducing adverse social consequences might be the
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

8 Heer

stipulation that licenses to bear children
be granted only at age 18 and that individuals under this age neither be allowed
to purchase licenses nor to be given licenses
by other persons. Before passing to another
topic, I should also like to note that probably many persons would consider it to be
inappropriate to invoke the penalty of
sterilization for women bearing an unlicensed child prior to the age at which they
could legally receive license units.

Boulding proposed to give each woman
child-license units in the form of deci-child
units and to provide sufficient deci-child
units to each woman (22 such units) so
that, on the average, each cohort of women
would exactly replace itself. Such a procedure has the disadvantage that it would
place a financial penalty on all women losing a child through death and give a financial gain to all women who never experience child loss. An alternative procedure
would be to give each woman sufficient license units to bear exactly two licensed
children and then allow the additional
number of license units required to replace
any children who died before they themselves reached licensing age. Thus, if the
age at which licenses were first granted was
18, then a woman losing a child before that
child reached its eighteenth birthday would
be given a sufficient number of license
units to bear an additional child; but if a
child died after its eighteenth birthday, its
mother would receive no additional units.

Boulding also neglected to consider what
to do if individuals with license units were
to die before they had used up all of their
units. Here a sensible choice might be to
include any existing license units as part
of the estate of the deceased and allow
them to be freely sold to anyone who
wished to purchase them.

Boulding also failed to consider the
problem of multiple births. I would suggest
that no penalty for additional birth should

Social Biology

be imposed if a woman with a multiple
birth possessed sufficient license units for
a single birth.

We now come to another matter posed
by Boulding—whether license units should
be given only to females or equally to both
females and males. I should like to point
out that Boulding neglected a third possibility—that all the license units should be
given to males. Let us consider for a moment this neglected alternative, which may
have considerable merit because it would
most probably ensure considerable reduction in the incidence of illegitimate births.
Consider a male who sires a child out-ofwedlock. It seems improbable that he
would wish to give up marketable license
units for this child when such units could
also be reserved for his legitimate children
or sold for cash. On the other hand, the
child’s mother might very well decide that
an abortion was preferable either to purchasing license units or to having her child
removed from her and placed under governmental custody. By way of contrast,
consider the consequences if all license
units were given only to females. Then a
woman having an out-of-wedlock birth
would be able to keep her child simply by
returning to the government the requisite
license units.

Boulding argues that there are considerations of equity involved in deciding
whether all of the license units should be
given to women or whether half of them
should be given to men. Obviously, since
the licenses are marketable, they might be
worth a great deal of money. If one takes
the position that women deserve compensation for the various discriminations
which they suffer in a man’s world, one
would probably opt for giving license units
only to women. On the other hand, if one
feels that illegitimacy is harmful and one
is relatively unconcerned about the status
of women, one would probably favor giv
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. 1

ing all of the units to men. A reasonable
compromise between these two conflicting
values might be to give half of the units
to women and half to the men.

Whether all license units went to one sex
alone or to both sexes equally would affect
the decision as to the number of license
units given to individuals who already had
living children at the time the licensing
scheme went into effect. Let us first consider the case where license units were
given equally to both men and women.
Here, it might seem sensible to subtract
0.5 license units per living child from the
units given each married individual. Furthermore, from the license units given unmarried persons, it might be appropriate to
subtract one unit per child either currently
in custody or who had been in custody at
the time he or she reached legal adulthood.
Let us consider next the case where license
units were given to members of one sex
only. Here, one license unit might be subtracted for each child in current or previous custody. In either case, if subtraction
resulted in a negative difference, it might
be appropriate to stipulate that no licensing
units be granted.

COMPARISON WITH OTHER SCHEMES

Let us now turn our attention to a comparison of marketable licenses with other
suggestions for achieving a desirable degree of fertility reduction. (For the most
comprehensive general discussion of various types of population policy, see Bernard
Berelson, 1969.)

At the present time, a large number of
people have faith that legalized abortion
and extension of subsidized family-planning services throughout the United States
will be sufficient to reduce the birth rate
to an acceptably low level. Proponents of
this belief point to the fact that both in
1972 and in 1973 the period net reproduction rate was less than 1.0 and therefore

Marketable Licenses for Babies

 

9

below replacement level (U.S. Bureau of
the Census, 1973a and Los Angeles Times,
Jan. 1, 1974). They rightly attribute a
large proportion of the recent very sharp
decline in U.S. fertility to recent advances
in contraceptive technology and to the governmental programs which enabled large
segments of the population to take advantage of them. Moreover, they see the recent
legalization of abortion as resulting in still
further fertility decline. They point out
that in the period 1960-65, 17 per cent of
all babies born in the United States were
unwanted at conception by either husband
or wife and 22 per cent by at least one
spouse (Bumpass and Westoff, 1970).
However, during the succeeding five years,
a time when the United States officially began a large-scale program to reduce unwanted conceptions among the poor, the
decline in the unwanted fertility rate was
substantial. For the total population, the
decline in the number of unwanted births
per 1,000 women years of exposure to the
risk of unwanted childbearing was 36 per
cent, and among blacks, 56 per cent (Westoff, 1972).

Opponents of the view that legal abortion and subsidized family planning are
sufficient to produce an acceptably low
birth rate put forth two arguments. First,
they assert that continuation of fertility at
replacement level is unacceptable because
it guarantees a substantial rise in U.S. population. Secondly, they argue that just as
fertility has manifested an exceedingly
rapid decline during the past decade, so
can it show an equally sharp rise in the
future. They maintain that variations in
desired number of children depend upon
many factors and that it is quite possible
that these factors could in the future combine in such a way as to produce once
more, as during the post-World-War-II
baby boom, a rather high average number
of wanted children per couple.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

10 Heer

Ansley J. Coale, although not an advocate of immediate measures beyond family
planning to reduce the U.S. birth rate, has
also recognized the inherent variability in
the average number of desired children.
He states, “I see no logical reason to expect that on average people would voluntarily choose a number of children that
would keep the Jong-run average a little
above two per couple” (Coale, 1970, p.
135).

In short, it is argued that although family planning programs may bring about
fertility reduction, they make no attempt
to achieve fertility control. For example, if
the government made it a national policy
for the 1974 birth rate to be only 12 per
thousand, there is no way that family planning programs alone could ensure this goal.

Judith Blake has been a forceful advocate of changes in social structure to eliminate “coercive pronatalism”’ (Blake,
1972). A similar argument has also been
advanced by Kingsley Davis (1967). Blake
argues that the ideology which insists that
every man and woman can only find complete personal fulfillment in parenthood
must be rejected. She insists that the taboo
on homosexuality and lesbianism be removed and that women should be allowed
to seek fulfillment in a career without feeling that this career must be combined with
parenthood. In part, the changes which
Blake advocates have already occurred in
the last five years, particularly among the
better-educated segments of the nation’s
young people. Although many of the
changes she advocates may be desirable in
their own right because they will serve to
raise the relative status of women, their
further effect on fertility is problematic because it is uncertain how much further
these changes can continue and how much
effect the changes, if made, would have on
fertility. For example, there may be no
way in which the coercive pronatalism ex
 

 

 

Social Biology

erted by potential grandparents can be reduced. Furthermore, the complete societal
acceptance of homosexuality or lesbianism
might have very little effect upon the birth
rate.

Let us now consider two types of policy
usually considered as more extreme than
those mentioned previously: childbearing
quotas and systems of financial incentive.
Quotas would simply allow each individual
a maximum of » children (for example, one
child) and no more. In a quota system all
individuals can be given identical quotas
or, alternatively, some individuals can be
given larger quotas than others. Many different types of financial incentive systems
are possible. To simplify our discussion let
us consider just three of these. The first
would provide a monthly financial subsidy
to persons with no more than the normative number of children for their age. A
second type would provide that persons
having more than the normative number of
children pay a monthly tax on each child
above the norm. A third type would provide that each couple pay a relatively large
lump-sum tax upon the birth of each child
above the normative number. Table 2 illustrates hypothetical financial details for
each of these three types of financial incentive systems.

A possible disadvantage of any system
of financial incentives compared with a
child-bearing quota or with present practice is that financial incentives might serve
to increase the inequality of financial conditions in which children are raised. Currently, considerable inequality exists because some children have richer parents
than others and because, within families of
the same income class, some children have
more siblings than others. These inequalities lead to such consequences as certain
children having a better probability of high
educational attainment than others with
equal ability (Duncan et al., 1972). A pol
 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. 1

TABLE 2

HYPOTHETICAL FINANCIAL DETAILS FOR THREE
TYPES OF FINANCIAL INCENTIVE SYSTEMS

A. Monthly Subsidy to Persons with No More
than the Normative Number of Living Children for Their Age

No. of Living Children

Age of 3 or
Persons 0 1 2 More
20-24 $50 eee

25-29 $150 $100 a s18

30-44 $150 $100 $50

B. Monthly Tax on Parents with More than the
Normative Number of Living Children to be
Paid until Child Reaches Age 18

No. of Living Children

0 . I 2 3 4 or More
$50 $50 times
no. in
excess
of 2

C. One-time Tax Payment at Birth of Child According to Number of Mother’s Living Children Immediately Prior to Birth of this Child

No. of Living Children Prior to Birth
0 1 2 or More

$5,000

icy of financial incentives would have the
direct effect of increasing the financial penalties on children born to parents who, despite the incentives, still chose to have large
families.

On the other hand, it is not always recognized that financial incentives might well
serve to motivate poor parents to have relatively fewer children and the rich relatively
more. If, for example, financial incentives
completely eliminated all large families
among the poor (this result is much more
likely when abortion is both legal and financially subsidized than when it is not),
then inequality for children would probably be less under a financial incentives
policy than at present, despite the fact
that incomes of large families would be
subject to negative transfer payments.

Different types of financial incentive

Marketable Licenses for Babies il

systems would probably have different consequences with respect to their effect on
the degree of inequality of financial support for children. It is possible, for example, that a one-time tax on excess children
might substantially reduce such inequality
since it is exceedingly probable that very
few poor parents would be able to make
the large lump-sum payment required.
However, until each of the various financial incentive systems is put into practice,
it is impossible to know precisely what effect it will have.

Some idea of the possible effect is obtainable through asking respondents how
they would react given the existence of
such incentives. A recent set of two studies
(Simon and Simon, 1973; Simon, 1974)
asked respondents whether a monthly tax
on children would affect their childbearing.
One-third of respondents with three or
more children replied that they would have
fewer children if they had to pay $25 a
month for each additional child after the
second, and 53 per cent replied they would
have fewer if forced to pay $300 a month.
Moreover, the lower the family income, ©
the higher the proportion of respondents
who stated they would respond to the incentive.

An identical child-bearing quota for
every couple would probably serve to reduce slightly current inequalities in financial conditions for children, since at the
present time there is a negative relationship between family income and number of
children (U.S. Bureau of the Census,
1973). Moreover, an individualized quota
system could be devised which would guarantee that only wealthy families be allowed
more than the normative number of children.

A major disadvantage of financial incentive systems over quota systems is that
they provide a much less exact mechanism
of fertility control. The incentives may

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

12 Heer

provide too much fertility or too little.
With other variables affecting fertility held
constant, the elasticity of childbearing with
respect to the value of the incentives could
be established through experience. However, it is not likely that these other factors would remain constant and therefore
it is not likely that a particular set of incentives could be relied upon to produce
nationwide a targeted number of annual
births.

Quotas, on the other hand, have the
great disadvantage of depriving parents
completely of freedom to choose the number of their children. Many persons consider that this denial of parental rights
makes a system of quotas morally unacceptable. Moreover, unequal quotas might
stir up so much hostility as to be politically
unacceptable.

Both the various types of financial incentive systems and the systems of childbearing quotas are dependent upon enforcement mechanisms. What are the differences between them in the ease and in the
acceptability of their enforcement mechanisms? With respect to financial incentives,
one must minimize the number of persons
who unlawfully collect a subsidy for having less than the normative number of children or unlawfully evade payment of a tax
for having more than the normative number. An acceptable level of compliance for
a system of financial incentives would
probably involve establishment of a nationwide system of personal identification numbers so that all living children could be
automatically associated in a computer
with their parents. This computer system
would make possible the detection of parents who willfully misreported the number
of their children to governmental authorities to gain financial advantage.

Once having detected a case of unlawful
reporting, the government would then have
to decide what sanctions to invoke. In the

Social Biology

case of a monthly subsidy for having relatively few children, the government could
easily refuse to make further payments;
and in the case of a monthly tax, the government could also easily enforce future
payment through payroll withholding. On
the other hand, a suitable penalty for past
illegal acceptance of the subsidy or for
past failure to pay a monthly childbearing
tax is more difficult to devise. Payment of
the money due the government might result in financial hardship not only to parents but also to children. A prison sentence
to impecunious offending parents would
also be harmful to the welfare of their children. Moreover, many persons would consider it unwise to have the government assume custody of older children whose parents had defrauded the government. Under
these conditions, perhaps it might be best
if there were no penalty for past failure to
comply with the law for parents below a
certain income level. For a one-time tax at
childbirth, an effective if not entirely acceptable enforcement mechanisms would be
the stipulation that if the tax were not
paid, custody of the child would revert to
the state.

What about a satisfactory means of enforcing individual childbearing quotas?
The conclusions reached earlier with regard to the enforcement of a marketable
license scheme and the one-time tax at
childbirth are equally relevant with respect
to childbearing quotas. To recapitulate,
the development of a long-term contraceptive implant would make enforcement much
easier. Furthermore, with or without such
an implant, perhaps the most acceptable
procedure to deal with children born without a license would be to put out for adoption as many of them as possible and place
the remainder under the guardianship of
the state.

Systems of financial incentive may also
be’ compared with childbearing quota sys
 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. I

tems with respect to eugenic consequences.
Since children of the well-to-do generally
have higher I.Q.’s than children of the
poor and since a system of financial incentives would probably deter childbearing
among the poor more than among the rich,
it is likely that financial incentives would
provide what many persons would consider
a eugenic effect. This eugenic effect would
be largely absent in a quota system which
allowed exactly the same number of children to each couple. On the other hand,
quotas could be individualized for a maximum eugenic effect. Bajema has suggested
a plan of this nature. He proposed that all
couples be given a preliminary, license to
have exactly two children. He then presumes that not all couples will be able or
will wish to have two children. These licenses will then be granted to applicants
who already have two children but want
more on the basis of proof of their genetic
superiority. This superiority would be established on the basis of contests involving
mental ability, personality, and athletic,
musical, artistic, literary, and business
skills (Bajema, 1971).

It should now be clear that the proposal
for marketable licenses is a compromise between proposals that place a childbearing
quota on individuals and proposals that
rely completely on financial incentives. In
essence, it places a childbearing quota on
the nation but leaves individuals technically free to have as many children as they
want subject to financial incentives to have
fewer.

How does the original Boulding proposal
for marketable licenses or the suggested
variant proposed here compare to the various financial incentive schemes and individual quota proposals we have discussed?
Table 3 presents an evaluation of the various relatively extreme proposals on the
several dimensions we have been considering. To summarize, in either version, mar
 

 

Marketable Licenses for Babies 13

ketable licenses would place fewer restraints on individual liberty than quota
systems. They would probably serve to increase equality of financial supports for
children, since it is likely that only the
well-to-do could afford to pay a sizeable
sum in advance for the privilege of having
more than two children. Enforcement
would appear to be as effective as for any
other proposal; however, the acceptability
of the enforcement mechanism might be inferior to that of the monthly subsidy and
monthly tax schemes. The original Boulding proposal would be able to keep the net
reproduction rate close to 1.0 but would be
less successful in keeping the crude birth
rate at a particular level. My own modification of the Boulding proposal would provide a mechanism for a fairly precise regulation of the birth rate itself. Finally, either
version of the marketable license proposal
would have a moderate eugenic effect. This
effect would obviously be less pronounced
than that of a quota system designed to
maximize eugenic effect.

However, a compromise between the
marketable license scheme and the eugenic
quota proposal is possible. Bajema (1971)
has already suggested the possibility of a
marketable license system in which prospective purchasers of license units for
children beyond the second child would
first have to pass a screening based on the
revealed genetic quality of their existing
children. Such a compromise proposal
would preserve many of the other advantages of the marketable licensing system.
However, the political acceptability of this
compromise proposal is more questionable
than that of a marketable license system
which does not attempt explicit eugenic
control.

Whether the United States will ever
adopt any of the seven relatively extreme
mechanisms in order to reduce its birth rate
cannot now be predicted. As Bernard Berl 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

TABLE 3

EVALUATION OF SEVEN RELATIVELY EXTREME SCHEMES For FERTILITY REDUCTION

FI

 

 

MARKETABLE LICENSE SYSTEMS

FINANCIAL INCENTIVE SYSTEMS

Inprvipuat Quota SysTEMsS

 

 

Boulding Proposal
Modified to Provide Monthly Subsidy to
That Licenses May Persons with No Monthly Tax on
Original Be Sold or Lent at More than the Persons with More Individual Quotas
Boulding Interest to the Normative No. of | than the Normative | One-time Tax for Identical Quota to Maximize
EFFECT Proposal Government Children No. of Children Excess Babies for All Couples Eugenic Effect

Restriction on

individual Moderately Moderately Moderately Moderately Moderately

liberty severe severe severe severe severe Very severe Very severe
Effects on

equality of =)

children’s g

financial Probably Probably Probably Slightly Moderately

support beneficial beneficial Unknown Unknown beneficial beneficial beneficial

Effective en- Effective en- Effective en- Effective en- Effective enforcement at forcement at forcement at forcement at forcement at
possible price possible price possible price possible price possible price

Effectiveness and of depriving of depriving of depriving of depriving of depriving

acceptability some children some children Fairly Fairly some children some children some children

of enforcement of a family of a family effective effective of a family of a family of a family

mechanisms environment environment enforcement enforcement environment environment environment
Effectiveness for

precise regula
tion of the

birth rate Moderate High Low Low Low Moderate Moderate
Eugenic effect Moderate Moderate Moderate Moderate Moderate Slight High

 

Adojorg [epog
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. 1

eson has correctly concluded, “What we
seek is human welfare, personal freedom,
the quality of life, and demographic trends
and changes take on meaning only insofar
as they contribute to such ends. Any evaluation should keep that closely in mind,
what we are really after. Some costs, in
short are too high, for population control
is not the final value” (Berelson, 1974, p.
12).

Accordingly, the outcome will probably
depend on three factors. The first is the
level of the birth rate attainable through
less extreme measures. The second is the
success that the United States will have in
finding a sufficient quantity of reasonablypriced natural resources. The third relates
to certain possible developments in the
technology of reproduction control. One of
these developments is, of course, the possibility of a safe and effective long-term contraceptive implant. Another would be the
development of a feasible technology to
choose the sex of one’s baby. Obviously
parents able to select the sex of all of their
children would be much more willing to
forego the privilege of having no more than
the normative number of children than
would those for whom the sex of their offspring was beyond control.

Moreover, if some reduction in the birth
rate were considered highly desirable, but
not at the expense of any increase in the
proportion of children reared outside of a

Marketable Licenses for Babies

15

normal family situation, and if it is also
assumed that the advances in reproduction
control we have discussed have not yet occurred, then among the seven relatively extreme proposals we have discussed, the one

‘most likely to be adopted would be either

the monthly subsidy plan or the monthly
tax. On the other hand, should the United
States decide that a rather precise regulation of its birth rate was indeed required,
then marketable licenses would seem in
most respects to have definite advantages
over alternative proposals, advantages
which would be strengthened if it were also
stipulated that the government had authority both to purchase license units from individuals and to pay interest on units until
they were used.

Paradoxically, however, it is conceivable
that perfection of the technological advances in reproduction control which would
serve to enhance the acceptability of the
marketable license and the other relatively
more extreme proposals might by themselves reduce fertility to such an extent
that the government would come to concern itself with raising the birth rate rather
than attempting to cut it down.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The contribution of Professor J. William
Leasure of California State University, San
Diego, in reviewing an earlier draft of this
manuscript is gratefully acknowledged.

REFERENCES

BayemMa, Cart. 1971. The genetic implications of
American life styles in reproduction and population control. Zn Carl J. Bajema (ed.), Natural selection in human populations. Wiley, New
York.

BERELSON, BERNARD. 1969. Beyond family planning. Stud. Fam. Plan. 1 (No. 38):1-16.

. 1974. An evaluation of the effects of population control programs. Stud. Fam. Plan 5
(No. 1):2-12.

BLAKE, JupiITH. 1972. Coercive pronatalism and
American population policy. Preliminary Paper
No. 2 (December). International Population
and Urban Research, University of California,
Berkeley.

 

 

Bourpinc, KennetH. 1964. The meaning of the
20th century. Harper and Row, New York.

Brown, Lester R. 1974. By bread alone. Praeger,
New York.

Bumpass, Larry, and Cuartes F. WEsTorF. 1970.
The “perfect contraceptive” population. Science
169 (Sept. 18):1177-1182.

CHASTEEN, Epcar. 1970. The case for compulsory
birth control. Mademoiselle magazine, January.

CoaLe, ANSLEY J. 1970. Man and the environment, Science 170 (Oct. 9):132-136.

CoMMISSION ON POPULATION GROWTH AND THE
AMERICAN Future. 1972. Population and the
American future. U.S. Government Printing
Office, Washington, D.C.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

16 Heer

Davis, Krycstey. 1967. Population policy: Will
current programs succeed? Science 158 (Nov.
10) :730-739.

. 1973. Zero population growth: The goal
and the means. Daedalus 102 (No. 4):15-30.
Duncan, Otis Duptey, Dav FEATHERMAN, and
BEVERLY Duncan, 1972. Socioeconomic background and achievement. Seminar Press, New

York.

FreyJKA, Tomas. 1973. The future of population
growth: Alternative paths to equilibrium. Wiley,
New York.

MENKEN, JANE. 1972. The health and social consequences of teenage childbearing. Fam. Plan.
Perspec. 4 (No. 3):45-53.

NasH, A. E. Kem. 1972. Demographology in U‘S.
population policies, Jn Richard L. Clinton and
R. Kenneth Godwin (eds.), Research in the
politics of population. D. C. Heath, Lexington,
Mass

 

Smo, Juan L, 1974. The effects of income on
fertility. Carolina Population Center, Chapel
Hill.

Smvron, Jurmun L., and Rita J. Srsron. 1973. The
effect of money incentives on family size: A

Social Biology

hypothetical-question study, Paper delivered at
the 1973 meeting of the Population Association
of America. Abstracted in Pop Index 39 (No.
3) 2335-336.

U.S. BureEAv OF THE Census. 1972. Illustrative
population projections for the United States:
The demographic effects of alternative paths to
zero-growth. Current Population Reports, Series
P-25, No. 480 (April). Government Printing
Office, Washington, D.C.

. 1973a. Estimates of the population of the

United States and components of change: 1972,

Current Population Reports, Series P-25, No.

499 (May). Government Printing Office, Wash
ington, D.C.

. 19736. Women by number of children
ever born. Census of population: 1970, Final
Report PC(2)-3A. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C,

WESTOFF, CHartes F, 1972. The modernization of
U.S. contraceptive practice. Fam. Plan. Perspec.
4 (No. 3):9-12.

ZERO PopuLATION Grow TH. 1973. ZPG goals. Zero
7) pulation Growth National Reporter 5 (No.

aie

 

 
