Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Are husbands a barrier to women's family
planning use? The case of Morocco

llene S. Speizer

To cite this article: Ilene S. Speizer (1999) Are husbands a barrier to women's family planning
use? The case of Morocco, Social Biology, 46:1-2, 1-16, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1999.9988984

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1999.9988984

 

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Fone | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 37
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 2 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:48

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Are Husbands a Barrier to Women’s Family
Planning Use? The Case of Morocco

 

Ilene S. Speizer

Department of International Health and Development
Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine
New Orleans, Louisiana 70112

ABSTRACT: Little is known about men’s role in the adoption of family planning. Recent studies
suggest that men may be a barrier to women’s use of family planning. However, it is not clear
whether husbands represent a true or a perceived barrier. Using the 1992 Morocco Demographic
and Health Survey data, this study examines (1) whether women and men report concordant fertility desires, discussions, and contraceptive use; (2) the accuracy of women’s perceptions of their
husbands’ fertility desires; and (3) whether husbands are a barrier to women’s family planning
use. The results demonstrate that, controlling for women’s own fertility desires, husbands’ true
fertility desires are associated with family planning use. Likewise, women who perceive their
husbands to want fewer children than they want are more likely to use family planning. Future
fertility and family planning programs need to include men to reduce their role as both perceived and true barriers to family planning use.

 

Until the late 1980’s, fertility and family planning information on men was
sparse. Consequently, to study couple fertility desires and family planning use, researchers often improvised with available
female data. Specifically, two methods
were employed to account for unavailable
male or couple responses. The first
method used women’s reported knowledge, attitudes, and practices (KAP) to
represent couple KAP (Greene and Biddlecom, 1997). This approach assumed
that husbands and wives had similar reproductive attitudes and goals, an assumption that has been found to be incorrect in a number of exhaustive literature
searches and studies that compare husbands’ and wives’ KAP (Becker, 1996;
Ezeh and Mboup, 1997; Mason and Taj,
1987). The second method used women’s
perceptions of their husbands’ KAP as a
proxy for the husbands’ true KAP. In
light of low levels of couple communica
tion in much of the developing world
(Ezeh et al., 1996), this approach may fail
because there is no reason to assume that
women would actually know their husbands’ KAP.

Using only female data, researchers
have done a number of studies which indicate that husbands are a barrier to
women’s family planning use. For example, using female data from several Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS), one
study shows that (1) husband disapproval
is among the top three reasons given by
women for nonuse of family planning; and
(2) the percentage of women using family
planning varies by whether or not the
women think their husbands approve of
family planning (Bongaarts and Bruce,
1995). Likewise, a recent study in Morocco finds that women report that husband’s opposition and religious opposition
are important barriers to family planning
use (Westoff and Bankole, 1998). Finally,
2 Speizer

a study among metropolitan women in Indonesia finds that perceived husband disapproval of family planning is an important determinant of family planning use
when women’s level of education and
number of living children is controlled
(Joesoef et al., 1988). Based on these studies, one would recommend that in order to
raise levels of family planning use,
women’s perceptions of their husbands’ attitudes must change, not necessarily the
husbands’ true attitudes.
To determine if husbands’ true aitti5 tudes have an effect on women’s family
® planning use, researchers need male data.
coo Many studies that have included both
S husbands and wives have indeed shown
= that husbands are a barrier to women’s
= family planning use (Casterline et al.,
= 1996; Ezeh, 1993; Kritz et al., 1995). For
spexample, a study using data from the
= Philippines finds that husbands’ fertility
S preferences are strongly associated with
‘6 whether or not women are currently using
family planning (Casterline et al., 1996).
5 This Philippine study also reveals compa‘a rable effects of husbands’ and wives’ fer= tility desires on women’s reported use of
S family planning to delay a birth. Simi> larly, a study using data from Ghana finds
3 that husbands’ fertility desires signifi‘é cantly affect women’s family planning
© approval (Ezeh, 1993). Furthermore, this
Ghana study provides focus group results
from men and women to demonstrate that
men are an important, recognized barrier
to women’s family planning use. Both the
Philippine and the Ghana studies fail to
determine the role of husbands as perceived and actual barriers to family planning use to permit an assessment of
whether perceived husband’s desire for
children is as important as husband’s actual desire.

ber 2015

Social Biology

The only recent studies found that include both the husbands’ perceived attitudes and the husbands’ true attitudes in a
model of women’s family planning use
were in Ghana (Salway, 1994) and Kenya
(Lasee and Becker, 1997). Using the
1988 Ghana Demographic and Health
Survey, Salway (1994) found that husband’s family planning approval, fertility
desires, and the wife’s perceptions of her
husband’s family planning approval were
not associated with the woman’s use of
family planning, controlling for the
woman’s own fertility desires. However,
husband’s reported discussion of family
planning was found to have an effect,
even after controlling for the woman’s reported discussion, suggesting an indirect
role of the husband on a woman’s family
planning use. The author concludes that
the attitudes and preferences of the wife
are more important in determining contraceptive use than the attitudes and preferences of the husband (Salway, 1994).

Similar to the Ghana study, a study using the 1989 Kenya Demographic and
Health Survey analyzed the role of husbands and wives in family planning decision making (Lasee and Becker, 1997).
This study finds that the important determinants of women’s family planning use
are knowledge by both spouses of a
source of family planning and the wife’s
perception of her husband’s approval of
family planning. The remaining communication variables—couple approval of
family planning, reported couple discussion of family planning, the wife’s own
approval, and the husband’s perception of
his wife’s approval—have no effect on
current family planning use. Also, couple
desire for children was not found to be
associated with family planning use. This
study revealed that husbands play a role
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

in family planning adoption, either by expressing their family planning attitudes to
their wives or based on normative views
of male family planning approval.

The above studies indicate that husbands have a potentially important role in
determining whether women adopt family
planning. Husbands may act as a perceived
barrier (Bongaarts and Bruce, 1995), a true
barrier (Casterline et al., 1996), or an indirect barrier (e.g., husbands’ reported discussion, Salway, 1994) to women’s family
planning adoption. No recent study, however, determines the role of husbands’ true
fertility desires and wives’ perceptions of
their husbands’ fertility desires simultaneously to determine whether, controlling for
women’s own fertility desires, husbands
are a true and/or perceived barrier to family
planning adoption. Furthermore, no study
has determined whether women’s perceptions of their husbands’ fertility desires correspond to the husbands’ true fertility desires.’ This information is important to
unravel whether perceived husband barriers are reflections of true husband attitudes,
or simply portray misconceptions based on
normative or expected high male fertility
desires.

Based on data from the 1992 Morocco
Demographic and Health Survey, this
study indicates the advantages of obtaining male data to assess if and how husbands are a barrier to women’s family
planning use. First, this analysis determines whether wives and husbands report
concordant fertility desires, discussions,
and contraceptive use, to demonstrate the
distinction between wives’ and husbands’

'Lasee and Becker (1997) examine the accuracy of
perceptions of approval of family planning and relate
this to couple communication, but do not examine accuracy of perceptions of fertility desires.

 

Husbands and Family Planning 3

reports of the same event. Second, an assessment of the accuracy of women’s perceptions of their husband’s fertility desires is presented. This information
provides an indication of whether
women’s reports can be used as a proxy
for husband data. Third, an analysis of
whether husbands are a barrier to
women’s family planning use is presented. This last analysis permits a determination of whether perceived husband
desires are as important as husband’s true
fertility desires in the Moroccan context.
The 1992 MDHS is particularly useful
for these analyses because of the availability of male data and because Morocco is
currently in a transitional stage of the fertility transition (Ashford, 1995). Among the
recent list of DHS countries with male data
(mostly sub-Saharan African countries),
Morocco is one of the few with a total fertility rate as low as 4.0 and current modern
family planning use at 36 per cent of married women.’ Because over a third of
women use modern family planning methods (and almost half use any method), it is
possible to examine differentials in
women’s reported use and relate these differentials to husbands’ fertility desires.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The data for these analyses are from the
Morocco Demographic and Health Survey
(MDHS) conducted between January and
April 1992 (Azelmat et al., 1993). In the
1992 MDHS, a sample of 9,256 women
between the ages of 15 and 49 was interviewed. Fifty-five per cent (N = 5,118) of
these women were married or in union. In

*Based on DHS IU countries. The one exception is
Egypt, 1992.
4 Speizer

addition to the female sample, all men
over age 20 (single and married) from a
third of the households visited for women
were eligible for interview. A total of
2,122 men were eligible for interview. Of
these men, 63 per cent were successfully
interviewed, resulting in a sample of 1,336
men in the 1992 MDHS. Because 30 per
cent of the male sample is single, and
many men did not match with a wife, the
— MDHS data contain information on a total
of 751 couples when spouses are matched.
5 The husband-wife sample is representative
3 of couples where the wife is between the
© ages of 15-49.> For these analyses, we do
oo not include couples with a currently pregS nant wife (17.8 per cent) and couples with
= missing responses for the variables of in= terest. The total sample size for these
= analyses is 567.
Sp For these analyses, perceived barriers
S to family planning use are based on
S women’s perceptions of their husbands’
6 fertility desires relative to their own fertility desires. Furthermore, true barriers to
3 family planning use are based on the hus‘= bands’ reported fertility desires. Both per-. ceived and true husband desires may be
S associated with women’s family planning
8 use through different mechanisms. Firstly,
<& women may act on the number of children
8 they think their husbands want. Secondly,
© men’s true desires may have an effect sepa arate from the effect of changing women’s
perceptions if, for example, a man who no
longer wants children is more likely to
discuss family planning or encourage family planning use without stating clearly his
fertility desires to his wife.
In the analyses of couple agreement,
husband and wife reports of desire for ad
>The sample of women is a self-weighting sample;
thus, the sample of couples is also.

Social Biology

ditional children, discussion of child desires, and current use of any family planning method are presented. In the MDHS,
both husbands and wives were asked if
they wanted another child, with the choice
of responses being: wants, does not want,
cannot have, spouse cannot have, and undecided. For men, the desire for child
variable has been coded as wants child,
and does not want child (see Table 1).
Men who said that they could no longer
have children are grouped with the men
who said they did not want children. Men
who reported that their wife could not
bear children or that they were undecided
were dropped from the analysis (N =
37). For women, a comparable desire for
child variable has been created, with
women who were undecided or had missing responses dropped from the analysis
(N = 36). The second variable used for
the agreement analysis is whether each
person reports ever discussing with his or
her spouse the number of children desired
(yes/no) (see Table 2). The third variable
used to examine spousal agreement is reported current use of any method of family planning by each partner (yes/no). For
each analysis of couple agreement kappa
values are presented and analyzed based
on the following scale: < 0 = poor agreement; 0 to 0.20 = slight agreement; 0.21
to 0.40 = fair agreement; 0.41 to 0.60 =
moderate agreement; 0.61 to 0.80 = substantial agreement; 0.81 to 1.0 = almost
perfect agreement (StataCorp, 1997).

To determine whether women’s reports of their husbands’ fertility desires

‘Those men who said their wives could not have
children are coded as missing because in Morocco men
have the option to take another wife or divorce and remarry to attain their fertility desires. Women did not
have this answer as a response option.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 46, No. 1-2 Husbands and Family Planning 5

TABLE 1

PER CENT DISTRIBUTION OF CURRENTLY MARRIED NONPREGNANT WOMEN RESPONDENTS (N = 567) IN
THE COUPLE SAMPLE BY SELECTED BACKGROUND CHARACTERISTICS AND FERTILITY DESIRES:
Morocco DEMOGRAPHIC AND HEALTH SURVEY, 1992

Characteristic Per Cent

EDUCATION

NOne 2... cc ccc eee eee e nee e eee eee eee eareesceneeeee 81.8

SOME . oc ccc ccc ee cee eee eet eee e eee eee e eee tere nates eeeenes 18.2
RESIDENCE

DAE, ie ya 84 HES be wkd Bee od bE FE Hn DEOES ed bE EE ST RSEE DH ed OS OE PRT RHE 40.7

RAL oie og R6 TRE S g ggd AE SERRE R ps TEE ES ORS Og eRe RO 59.3
OCCUPATION

RINEROVEN ou we ma Oe Ro OF ON HAO OO Be SO OS Oe SL Oe AE ES BS Oe OS So Oe ee Be as 8 78.8

Employed 2.0... . 0. ccc ccc ccc cece eee renee ete tee e ee nace nee eeeenes 21.2
TYPE OF FLooR

UNGiniSH@d . o, p< 35a pce wwee ce re thy weg ge oa PRET Begs Bags pony eHs i RS 34.4

Finished 1.0... 0. ccc ccc ccc cece ee cen cere e tenet eeneeeeeraetees 65.6
PARITY

O-L births oc cc cece eee eee et tee eee tae ees eeteesens 8.8

2+ births 0... ce cee tcc erect ee ee ee eee eee te enees 91.2
BIRTH IN LAST YEAR

ING oon ca waeee ce ee ca nee oe en ee oe be ne ee eee oe eS AE eed kee ge ed OE be ok 75.5

ES oc tide ce ge th NV ged Ri gg BS A OE Ese oe EE py ON Ad Od OE hy oe 24.5
7 6) 33.5

Mean (standard deviation) ......... cece cece eee eect cnet ete eenaees (8.1)
DESIRE FOR CHILD (wife)

Does not want 0.0... cc ec cc ce cee eee eee ee tee tee tee e cette eeeeenee 56.8

Wants, delay 2.0... cece cee cece e eee eee eee tenet ee eee ee ete eees 26.1

Wants, NOW 1... ccc ce cee eee eee e ee eee e eee eee e eee eteneees 17.1
HUSBAND’S DESIRE FOR CHILD?

Des: NOt WANE 6 oa vs coe Oo e oa ee RS ee Ree OO od Oe ee Oe ee ee 55.7

WamtS 2... cece cece cece ee cere ee et ene neat ence este e nett eee enreteens 44,3
WIFE’S PERCEPTION OF HUSBAND’S FERTILITY DESIRE

Wants same number as woman ....... ec cece cece ccc terete eee ete eesenes 63.3

WantS MOre 0... . cee cece cece eee nett eee tees eet eeeeeteres 18.7

Warts FEWEE 2. nu 86 on ne tn ne eed bd Ge ee be eee ee ng BS Ba oS EM Higa ad By we RH OD 10.6

Don’t know 1.0.2.2... 0. ccc ce ete eee ee eet een eee t eee e eee eteenee 74

“As reported by husband.

are an appropriate proxy for the husbands’
true fertility desires, information on
whether women think their husbands want
another child or not is needed. Unfortunately, this information is not available in
the MDHS and it is necessary to improvise
with available data.’ Therefore, this analy
‘In the Demographic and Health Surveys, information on women’s perceptions of their husbands’ approval
of family planning is available and can be compared to
the husbands’ true approval. For this analysis, this infor
 

sis uses information on whether women
think their husbands want the same number, more, or fewer children than themselves, and this information is compared to

‘the husbands’ true reported fertility de
sires. With this perceived fertility information, four categories are created: husband

mation is not used because the goal is to determine
whether husbands’ fertility desires are a barrier to family planning use and not whether husbands’ opposition
to family planning is a barrier to use.

 
6 Speizer

wants the same number of children; husband wants more children; husband wants
fewer children; and does not know husband’s desire (see Table 1).

The analysis of perceptions is performed separately for women who no
longer want children and women who
want additional children. If 2 woman who
no longer wants children says that her hus
in band wants the same number of children

S she does, it is expected that the husband

will report a desire to stop childbearing.

e Similarly, for a woman who no longer

Swants children and thinks her husband

Qwants fewer children than she does, it is

Sexpected that the husband also does not

“want another child. Finally, if a woman

who no longer wants children says that her

shusband wants more children than she

‘Sdoes, the husband is expected to want an
-Zother child (see Table 3). It is possible that

=this last categorization may be misrepre
c_sented. For example, a woman who says

° that her husband wants more children than

Z she does may have had more children than

2 she desired to meet her husband’s desires,

Sand at this time, the husband no longer

‘>wants children because they have met his

“desires. While it is not possible to tease

gout the misrepresented cases, we offer this

possibility as a caveat of this analysis of

F relative fertility desires.

A Likewise, among women who want
more children we compare their perceptions of their husbands’ relative fertility
desires to the husbands’ true reported fertility desires. A woman who wants additional children and reports that her husband wants the same number of children is
expected to have a husband who wants
more children. Furthermore, if a woman
who wants more children says that her
husband wants more children than she
does, he is also expected to want more

Uni

Social Biology

children. Finally, it is not possible to determine the expected husband fertility desire
among women who want additional children and report that their husbands want
fewer children than themselves because
this situation could equate to a male desire
to stop or not to stop childbearing. The
numbers and per cents for this last category are presented, but are not discussed.
These types of comparisons permit an assessment of whether women have an idea
of their husbands’ fertility desires, or if
perceptions are more likely to reflect the
informant’s own desires or some normative perception of male fertility desires.
Finally, to assess whether husbands
are a barrier to women’s family planning
use, multivariate logistic regression
analyses of women’s reported current use
of any family planning method are presented. Both modern and _ traditional
methods are used because the focus is on
whether husbands’ desires (true or perceived) affect women’s family planning
adoption, whatever the method. The results are the same when only modern
methods are the focus of analysis because
the pill represents 85.5 per cent of the contraceptive use in Morocco. The independent variables of interest are: relative perceptions of the husband’s fertility desire
and husband’s true desire for children,
both as coded above. This analysis also
controls for the woman’s own desire for
additional children. Other control variables
included in the analyses are background
demographic characteristics of the women.
Husband characteristics have not been included because of the high collinearity between wife and husband characteristics and
because the dependent variable of interest
is women’s reported family planning use,
not couple use or husband use. The female
control variables included are: education
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

 

Husbands and Family Planning 7

TABLE 2

MEASURING HUSBAND AND WIFE AGREEMENT ON REPORTED FERTILITY DESIRES, FAMILY SIZE, DISCUSSIONS,
AND CURRENT FAMILY PLANNING USE: Morocco DHS, 1992

PANEL A. DESIRE FOR ADDITIONAL CHILDREN

HusBaNnpb’s DESIRE

Does not want Wants another child ALL HusBANDS
DESIRE
Does not want ........... 263 (46.4%) 59 (10.4%) 322 (56.8%)
Wants another child ...... 53 (9.4%) 192 (33.9%) 245 (43.2%)
All Wives ........0.00eeeeee 316 (55.7%) 251 (44.3%) wae
Kappa value: agreement = 80.3%; kappa statistic = 0.60
PANEL B. DISCUSSION OF NUMBER OF CHILDREN DESIRED
HUSBAND’sS REPORT
Did not discuss Discussed ALL HUSBANDS
REPORT
Did not discuss .......... 79 (13.9%) 118 (20.8%) 197 (34.7%)
Discussed .............65 75 (13.2%) 295 (52.0%) 370 (65.3%)
All Wives ........ cee eee eee 154 (13.2%) 413 (72.8%) ws
Kappa value: agreement = 66.0%; kappa statistic = 0.21
PANEL C. CURRENT USE OF ANY FORM OF FAMILY PLANNING
HUSBAND‘S REPORT
Not using Using ALL HUSBANDS
WIFE’S REPORT
NOUUSING c2c4 cs ce ee vanes 251 (44.3%) 44 (7.8%) 295 (52.0%)
USing 20... cece ee eee eee 30 (5.3%) 242 (42.7%) 272 (48.0%)
All wives ..........-.000 0s 281 (49.6%) 286 (50.4%) a

Kappa value: agreement =

(none/some),° age, place of residence
(rural/urban), employment (unemployed/
employed), and type of floor in the household (unfinished/finished floor) (see Table
1 for distributions). We include type of
floor in the household as an indicator of
household socioeconomic status. Additional female control variables include
whether or not the woman had a birth in
the last year, which controls for whether or
not the woman is exposed to the risk of
childbearing (breastfeeding or amenortheic),
and the parity of the woman, coded zero or

‘Several coding schemes for education were tested.
All approaches gave similar results as this simple categorization.

87.0%; kappa statistic = 0.74

one birth versus two or more births.’ Where
appropriate, interaction terms were created
and tested to determine whether differences
in husbands’ fertility desires (true or perceived) are associated with the wives’ own
fertility desires.

RESULTS
HUSBAND AND WIFE AGREEMENT

To determine if husbands and wives in
the MDHS give similar responses to questions on fertility desires, child discussions,

Several categorizations for number of children were
tested. The results demonstrated that having two or
more births compared to 0-1 birth had the same effect
as each of the other categories.

 
8 Speizer

and family planning use, we present
matched husband and wife responses in
Table 2. Panel A of Table 2 presents the
comparison of husband and wife reported
desire for additional children. At the aggregate level, women and men have similar fertility desires. When partners are
matched, however, 20 per cent of couples
disagree on child desires. Couples that
cn disagree are divided equally such that
= neither partner is more likely to want or
“ not want another child. The kappa value
reveals a moderately high level of agree® ment, but not perfect agreement. The
A level of concordance between Moroccan
20 couples is similar to the level found in a
00 recent multi-country comparison (Becker,
ci 1996). In contrast, the multi-country
~ study found that when there is disagreer= ment on fertility desires between spouses,
Sp generally men are more likely than
‘5 women to want more children, a finding
= that does not hold in this Moroccan ex6 ample (Becker, 1996).
The test of husband and wife concor© dance on discussion of number of chil= dren desired is presented in Panel B of
= Table 2. At the aggregate level, 65 per
©’ cent of women and 73 per cent of men re© port that discussion ever took place. In
= contrast, when couples are matched, only
'E 52 per cent of husbands and wives actuA ally agree that discussion ever took place.
The kappa value for this variable reveals
low levels of agreement. Interestingly,
among the disagreeing couples, about
two-thirds are couples where the husband
reports that discussion took place and the
wife does not. There are several possible
explanations for this greater male reported discussion. First, a man may have
told his wife something that she heard (or
did not hear) but did not perceive as a discussion. Second, men may be reporting

rsity

1V

y [U

ded

Social Biology

discussion that took place with another
partner than the matched wife (e.g., another wife or girlfriend). Third, men may
say discussion took place when it never
did because they think this is the accepted, expected response. Based on the
available data, it is not possible to determine the true cause of differential reporting. This example illustrates that caution
is necessary when matching couple responses or when one spouse’s report is
used to represent couple communication.
The final test of agreement examines
couple family planning use and is presented in Panel C of Table 2. This table
indicates that at the aggregate and couple
level there is high concordance between
husbands and wives on reported current
family planning use, consistent with a recent multi-country study on couple contraceptive use (Becker, 1996). Again, this
agreement is not perfect (kappa value of
0.74) which could be a consequence of
several factors. For example, women may
use methods without the knowledge of
their husbands (e.g., pill or IUD) or be
less likely to report male method use.
Also, the male and female reports would
differ if men report condom use that took
place with another partner than the
matched wife (Ezeh and Mboup, 1997).

WOMEN AS PROXIES FOR MEN

To test whether women’s reports can
be used as proxies for obtaining husband
data, this section explores perceptions of
spousal desire for additional children. In
Panel A of Table 3, using women who no
longer want children, the comparison of
the wife’s perception of her husband’s
fertility desire and his true fertility desire
is presented. Sixty-four per cent of
women who do not want any more children think that their husbands want the

 
 

 

Vol. 46, No. 1-2 Husbands and Family Planning 9
TABLE 3
COMPARISONS OF WIVES’ PERCEPTIONS OF THEIR HUSBANDS’ DESIRE FOR ADDITIONAL CHILDREN AND
THE HUSBANDS’ TRUE DESIRES FOR CHILDREN, BY WOMEN’S OWN DESIRE FOR CHILDREN,
Morocco DEMOGRAPHIC AND HEALTH SURVEY, 1992
Panel A. Women’s Report of Husband’s Desire for Children and Husband’s True Desire
Among Women Who No Longer Want Children (N = 322)
HUSBAND’S DESIRE
Does not want Wants another child ALL HusBANDs
WOMEN’S PERCEPTION OF DESIRE
Same (i.e., does not want) .......... 173 33 206 (64.0%)
More (i.e., wantS) .........00-c eee 43 13 56 (17.4%)
Fewer (i.e., does not want) .......... 35 7 42 (13.0%)
Does not know ........0c2eeeeeees 12 6 18 (5.6%)
All wives ....... 2c cece cece eee aes 263 (81.7%) 59 (18.3%)
PANEL B. WOMEN’S REPORT OF HUSBAND’S DESIRE FOR CHILDREN AND HUSBAND’S TRUE DESIRE
AMONG WOMEN WHO WANT MORE CHILDREN (N = 245)
HUSBAND'S DESIRE
Does not want Wants another child ALL HusBANDS
WOMEN’S PERCEPTION OF DESIRE
Same (i.e., wants) 31 122 153 (62.5%)
More (i.e., wants) 7 43 50 (20.4%)
Fewer (i.e., does not want or wants) 11 7 18 (7.4%)
Does not know 4 20 24 (9.8%)
All wives 53 (21.6%) 192 (78.4%)

same number of children that they do.
This finding implies that the women think
their husbands do not want additional
children. Eighty-four per cent of these
women actually have husbands who do
want to stop childbearing (173/206). Similarly, among women who think that their
husbands want fewer children than they
do, 83 per cent actually have husbands
who say they do not want any more children. In contrast, among women who
think their husbands want more children
than they do, only 23 per cent actually
have husbands who want another child
(13/56). This finding suggests that perceived high fertility desires of husbands
by wives do not necessarily correspond to
the husbands’ true desires, or that women
may have gone beyond their own fertility
desires to meet their husbands’ desires,

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

now resulting in the husband being prepared to stop childbearing.

In Panel B of Table 3, a similar analysis
is presented for women who want additional children. Notice that like women
who do not want any more children, a similar, large per cent of women think their
husbands want the same number of children that they do (i.e., the husband wants
children). The majority of these women are
correct in this perception. The same high
level of accuracy is also found among
women who think their husbands want
more children than they do (i.e., the husband wants children). Finally, among
women who want additional children, 10
per cent report that they do not know their
husbands’ fertility desire. This per cent is
higher than the per cent among women
who no longer want children (6 per cent).
 

10 Speizer

Women who want to continue childbearing
have less need to discuss fertility desires
with their spouse and are more likely to
lack knowledge of their husbands’ desires.
These results suggest that women in
the MDHS tend to be knowledgeable of
their husbands’ fertility desires when they
think their spouse has similar fertility desires to themselves. In contrast, when
inthese women think that their husbands
S have differing fertility desires than themSelves, the perception may be incorrect or
"= May represent a case where the woman
8 had more children that she desired to acA commodate her husband’s fertility desires.
& Finally, women who no longer want chil¢ dren are more likely to report a perception
©° of their husbands’ desire than women who
want additional children. This finding
‘Ssuggests that when fertility desires are
amet by a woman in Morocco, couples
.2 may be more likely to interact and discuss
< subsequent fertility preferences.

HUSBANDS AS A BARRIER
TO WOMEN’S USE

The final analysis examines whether, in
">the Moroccan context, husbands are a barStier to women’s family planning use. In
g the 1992 Morocco DHS, the second most
important reason for nonuse of family
5 planning given by women who want no
Amore children and are not menopausal or
Sterile is that the husband disapproves of
family planning (the first reason being
health concerns). There are many problems with using this simple question to assess the effect of husband approval on
women’s contraceptive use (Bongaarts and
Bruce, 1995). However, it does give a preliminary indication of the role of husbands
in family planning adoption. Because, as
shown above, women’s perceptions of
their husbands’ fertility or family planning

University of M

Social Biology

attitudes do not necessarily correspond to
the husbands’ true attitudes, it is not clear
whether reported husband disapproval of
family planning is a true or simply a perceived barrier to family planning use.

This analysis tests whether husbands
are indeed a barrier to women’s family
planning use, and if so, if this is a true or
a perceived barrier (or both). The coefficients from the logistic regression analysis of the determinants of women’s current use of any family planning method
are presented in Table 4. Four models are
presented. The first model includes
women’s perceptions of their husbands’
fertility desires. The second model is the
same as the first with an interaction term
for women who want more children and
report that they do not know their husbands’ fertility desires. The third model
includes only the husbands’ true desire
for additional children. Finally, the fourth
model includes both the husbands’ true
fertility desires and the wives’ perceptions of their husbands’ fertility desires.
Note that only the first and second models that determine the role of husbands as
perceived barriers could be presented if
male data had not been collected in the
MDHS.

The effects of the background variables in each model are similar. Women
who are older or have had a birth in the
last year are less likely to use family
planning than younger women and
women who have not had a birth in the
last year. Conversely, women who have
any education, are from urban areas, or
have a finished floor are more likely to
use family planning than the less modernized women. Finally, women who have a
low parity (0-1 children) are less likely to
currently use family planning than
women who have had two or more births.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

Husbands and Family Planning

 

TABLE 4

LOGISTIC COEFFICIENTS FOR ANALYSIS OF WHETHER HUSBANDS ARE A PERCEIVED OR
TRUE BARRIER TO WOMEN’S FAMILY PLANNING USE, Morocco DHS, 1992

Variable Model I

AGE
RESIDENCE
Rural (ref) 2.0.2.0... 2. eee eee
UPBAH . 0a cnc e eid tb 86 UR ee ewe
EDUCATION
None (ref)
Some
WOMEN’S EMPLOYMENT
Not working (ref)
Working ..... 0... cece eee ee eee
TYPE OF FLOOR
Unfinished (ref)
itl: ee er
BIRTH IN LAST YEAR
No birth (ref)
At least one birth
NUMBER OF CHILDREN
2 or more (ref)
hPa 5 pes erod gea* OX be ees Geen
Woman’s DESIRE FOR CHILD
Does not want (ref)
Wants ....... cece eee ee ce eee
PERCEPTION OF HUSBAND’S DESIRE
Same as woman (ref) ...........
Husband wants more
Husband wants fewer ..........
Wife does not know ............
HUSBAND’S TRUE CHILD DESIRE
Does not want (ref)
WamtS . 2.0... cee eee eee eee ee
INTERACTION: wants child and
does not know husband’s desire ....

eoreree ee ees ee ao nee ene

oer entree ermn ewe eee wrnewa nea

oop Pp em eP ewe ewes
ere ere eae en aeane
eooer te mae nee nae wae
ae ee ee eae e ene e ne

eeore eee er ee nae eeve

eve wesw er swe

ee oe ey

Model chi-square (d.f.)
No, of observations
2m = 0.10.

bn = 0.05.
*p = 0.001.

219.15 (11)
567

These women have not yet met their desired family size and therefore have less
need for family planning than women
who have had more births and are closer
to attaining their desired family size.

The effects of women’s perceptions of
their husbands’ desire for children and
husbands’ true desire for additional children are presented at the bottom of Table
4, Note first that in all the models,

—0.12 (0.02)°

0.51 (0.25)?

0.55 (0.30)?

0.33 (0.26)

1.11 (0.27)°

— 1.74 (0.27)°

—4.16 (0.77)°

—1.54 (0.27)°

—0.09 (0.27)
0.69 (0.34)°
~0.51 (0.45)

11
Model II Mode! II Model IV
—0.12 (0.02) 0.13 (0.02) —0.13 (0.02)
0.49 (0.25)2 0.49 (0.25)? 0.52 (0.26)?
0.54 (0.30)4 0.62 (0.30)° 0.58 (0.30)4
0.33 (0.26) 0.30 (0.25) 0.33 (0.26)
1.15 (0.26)° 1.07(0.26)° 1.11 (0.26)
—1.73 (0.27)  —1.75(0.27)© —1.73 (0.27)¢
—4,14(0.77) —4.04(0.78)© —4.02 (0.78)¢
—1.66 (0.28)  —1.32(0.30)  —1.42(0.31
—0.09 (0.27) ~—0.04 (0.27)
0.68 (0.34)? 0.63 (0.34)4
—1.50 (0.71)° — 1.47 (0.72)?
—0,58 (0.27) —0.49 (0.27)
1.86 (0.91)? 1.83 (0.92)?
223.52 (12) 217.08 (9) 226.81 (13)
567 567 567

women’s own desire for children is an
important determinant of any family
planning use. Women who report that
they want additional children are less
likely to use family planning than women
who no longer want children. Model I
demonstrates that women who think that
their husbands want fewer children than
they do are more likely to use family
planning than women who think their
 

12 Speizer

husbands want the same number of children. Women who think their husbands
want fewer children than they do may use
family planning to meet their perceived
husbands’ lower fertility desires (to stop
or delay a birth), with the hope that later,
if a difference in fertility desires exists, it
can be resolved. In this model, the other
perception variables are not significant.
i. Model II includes an interaction term
Sand demonstrates that among women
+; who no longer want children, not know€ ing the husbands’ fertility desires is asso9 8 ciated with less family planning use comA pared to women who no longer want
children and think their husbands want
the same number of children. Conseco quently, these women who do not know
a their husband’s fertility desires are proba‘sbly more likely to have another child
since they are not using family planning
2to avoid the next unwanted (by the
woman) pregnancy (Bankole, 1995;
° Westoff and Bankole, 1998). The interac% tion term in this model is positive and
© significant illustrating an attenuated ef5 fect for women who want additional chil> dren. Compared to women who no longer
Want children and think their husbands
3 ~ want the same number of children as they
So, women who want more children and
= do not know their husbands’ fertility deAsires are less likely to use family planning.® No other interactions were found
to be significant in this model. Therefore,
perceptions of husbands’ fertility desires
are not necessarily a barrier to family
planning use in Morocco, but rather may
be a barrier to attaining desired family

‘For this group, the effect is —1.30 (—1.66 +
—1.50 + 1.86), slightly larger than the effect for
women who no longer want children and do not know
their husbands’ fertility desires (— 1.50).

Social Biology

size, especially for women who want
more children but think their husbands
want fewer children, or for women who
lack knowledge of their husbands’ fertility desires.

In Model III, the effects of husbands’
true fertility desires are presented. Controlling for a woman’s own fertility desire, if the husband reports that he wants
additional children then the woman is
less likely to report family planning use.
No interaction was found between
women’s desire for children and husbands’ true desire for additional children.

Model IV in Table 4 presents the results of the analysis that includes perceived desire for additional children, the
husbands’ true desire for additional children, and the important interaction term
above. The results of this model are similar to the two previous models, indicating
an additive effect of perceived and true
husband fertility desires. The test of significance between Model II and Model IV
gives a chi-square of 3.29 with 1 degree
of freedom (p = 0.07) which is borderline
significant, indicating that both the husbands’ true and perceived fertility desires
are potentially important. For example,
controlling for women’s own fertility desires, we find that husbands’ true desire
for additional children is associated with
nonuse of family planning. Also, women
who perceive that their husbands want
fewer children than they do are more
likely to use family planning than women
who think their husbands want the same
number of children as they do. Finally,
women who report not knowing their husbands’ fertility desires are less likely to
use family planning. In this model, the effect of husbands’ true fertility desires may
be mediated by greater husband-wife
communication, more positive husband

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

attitudes toward family planning, or
greater exposure to family planning information. These mediating effects do not
necessarily result in changing the wife’s
perceptions of her husband’s fertility desires, but may result in current family
planning use.

Figure 1 presents simulation results
based on Model IV in Table 4. These simulations indicate the effect of each husband barrier on the level of contraceptive
use, holding all other variables constant.
Among all nonpregnant women, 48 per
cent are using some form of family planning in the original data. If, however, all
husbands were to want more children,
only 43 per cent of women would currently use any family planning. Conversely, if all the husbands did not want
another child, 51 per cent of women
would use family planning. The effects of
husbands as perceived barriers are also
shown in Figure 1. Holding all other variables constant, if all women thought their
husbands wanted fewer children than
themselves, 58 per cent of women would
currently use some form of family planning. If all women did not want children
and did not know their husbands’ fertility
desires, only 32 per cent of women would
use any family planning. The level of
family planning use is slightly higher (39
per cent) in the case where all women
want more children but do not know their
husbands’ fertility desires. These women
may use family planning to space their
next desired birth.

DISCUSSION

To determine whether husbands are
women’s barrier to family planning use, it
is important to obtain data from husbands
on their KAP. Without male data, infer
Husbands and Family Planning

13

ences on men’s role in family planning
adoption remain just that—inferences. A
number of recent studies have demonstrated that using women’s responses to
represent the couple may be misleading
because husbands and wives do not necessarily report concurrent family planning attitudes and behaviors (Becker,
1996). This finding was true also for Moroccan couples. This analysis demonstrated that using women’s reported discussion or desire for children to represent
the discussion or fertility desire of the
couple would result in a number of misclassified couples. However, using
women’s report on current family planning use would result in less incorrect
classifications, but the number would still
be greater than zero.

This study also determined whether
women’s perceptions of their husbands’
fertility desires adequately represent the
husbands’ true fertility desires and could
be used as a proxy for obtaining husband
data. Although there was high accuracy
for the majority of women who thought
that their husbands had similar fertility
desires, when the women thought their
husbands had differing fertility desires,
the women tended to be wrong. This assessment is limited by the available data
which do not correspond exactly to the
husband-desire questions. Better data on
women’s perceptions of their husbands’
desire for another child and the number of
additional children desired are needed to
determine completely whether women’s
reports of their husbands’ fertility desires
can be used as a proxy for the husbands’
true desires.

Finally, this analysis showed that there
are multiple influences on women’s family planning use. First, a woman’s ‘own
desire affects whether or not she adopts

 
 

 

vi

0.7

0.6

oS
in

Per cent using any contraception
°
>

 

 

NY

—
So
N

an
2

&

o

O

o

A

00

Co

00

T

cn

—

3

= 0.3

5

5 s
i= g,
O N
> 0.2 e
Cy

©

2

f 0.1

ha

S

=

a

5 0

co

3 Original Data All husbands All husbands Women think Women think Women think Allwomendo All women want

s want children do not want husbands want husbands want husbands want not want and and do not

"a any more children same number more children fewer children donotknow _ know husbands’ oe)
e of children husbands’ desire desire 8.

>
a Husband as barrier oS
S
°
Fic. 1.—Simulation for per cent of women using any contraception under various husband barrier scenarios (based on Model IV of Table 4) S|

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 46, No. 1—2

family planning. Second, controlling for
a woman’s own fertility desires, her husband’s true fertility desires affect use.
Third, among women who want no more
children, if the wife reports that her husband’s fertility desires are unknown, she
is less likely to use family planning and a
subsequent birth is probably more likely
to take place. These women have a true
unmet need for family planning because
they are at the most risk of having an unwanted (to the woman) birth. These
women could be affected indirectly by
family planning programs that focus on
men and men’s role in reproductive
health. Increasing men’s involvement in
family planning by promoting couple discussions and recommending that men accompany women to family planning facilities may make it more likely that
women learn their husbands’ desires and
thus adopt family planning when they
and their husbands no longer want children. An additional important determinant of women’s family planning use is
the perception that the husband wants
fewer children than the woman, controlling for the woman’s own fertility desire.
Thus, some women who still want children may be adopting family planning to
meet the perceived lower fertility desires
of their husbands. These women could be
using family planning to space their
births but subsequently may need family
planning to limit childbearing once they
meet their own fertility desires and the

Husbands and Family Planning 15

perception of their husbands’ lower fertility desires. It would be useful to provide
information to these women on long-term
methods (e.g., IUD and implant) that
could be adopted to meet both their own
and their husbands’ current or future fertility desires.

Family planning researchers have
made great strides in understanding and
assessing women’s unmet needs for family planning. Clearly, there are several
groups of women with an unmet need.
Some have an unmet need because of a
lack of access or knowledge of family
planning or distribution facilities. Others
have an unmet need but have husbands
who want more children and are a barrier
to women’s adopting family planning. Finally, some women have an unmet need
but perceive their husbands to be a barrier
to family planning adoption. Family
planning programs that increase male involvement will not only reduce misconceptions about high male fertility desires,
but also could reduce the effect of husbands as true and perceived barriers to
family planning use.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Support for this project came from the
EVALUATION Project (Contract DPE-3060C-00-1054-00). The author would like to
thank Jane T. Bertrand, Stan Becker, and
Robert Magnani for their insightful comments
on an earlier version of this paper. Permission
to use these DHS data was granted by Macro
International, Inc.

REFERENCES

ASHFORD, L. 1995. New perspectives on population:
Lessons from Cairo. Pop. Bull. 50.

AZELMAT, M., M. AYAD, and E. A. Housn. 1993, Enquéte nationale sur la population et la santé,
1992, Macro International, Columbia, MD.

BANKOLE, A. 1995. Desired fertility and fertility be
havior among the Yoruba of Nigeria: A study of
couple preferences and subsequent fertility. Pop.
Stud. 49:317-328.

BECKER, S. 1996. Couples and reproductive health:
A review of couple studies. Stud. Fam. Plan.
27:291-306.
 

16 Speizer

BONGAARTS, J., and J. BRucE. 1995. The causes of
unmet need for contraception and the social
content of services. Stud. Fam. Plan. 26:57-75.

CASTERLINE, J. B., A. E. PEREZ, and A. E. BIDDLECoM. 1996. Factors underlying unmet need for
family planning in the Philippines. Population
Council Working Papers, Number 84.

EzeH, A. C. 1993. The influence of spouses over
each other’s contraceptive attitudes in Ghana.
Stud. Fam. Plan. 24:163~-174.

EZEH, A. C., and G. MBoup. 1997. Gender differentials in contraceptive prevalence rates. Stud.
Fam. Plan. 28:104-121.

EZEH, A. C., M. Seroussi, and H. RAGGERS. 1996.
Men’s fertility, contraceptive use, and reproductive preferences. Demographic and Health Surveys Comparative Studies, Number 18, Macro
International, Calverton, MD.

GREENE, M. E., and A. E. BIDDLECOM. 1997. From
absent to problematic: Men in demographic accounts of reproduction. Paper presented at the
annual meetings of the Population Association
of America, March, Washington, D.C.

OESOEF, M. R., A. L. BAUGHMAN, and B. Utomo.
1988. Husband’s approval of contraceptive use

‘48 08 December 2015

=

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13

Social Biology

in metropolitan Indonesia: Program implications. Stud. Fam. Plan. 19:162-168.

Kritz, M. M., P. MAKINWA-ADEBUSOYE, and F. Du.
1995. Spousal agreement, women’s status and
family planning in Nigeria. Cornell University
Working Paper, Number 95-07, Ithaca, NY.

LaseE, A., and S. BECKER. 1997. Husband-wife
communication about family planning and contraceptive use in Kenya. Int. Fam. Plan. Pers.
23: 15-20 and 33.

Mason, K. O., and A. M. Tas. 1987. Differences
between women’s and men’s reproductive goals
in developing countries. Pop. Devel. Rev.
13:611-638.

SALWAY, S. 1994. How attitudes toward family planning and discussion between wives and husbands affect contraceptive use in Ghana. Int.
Fam. Plan. Pers. 20:44-47, 74.

STATACORP, 1997. Stata Statistical Software: Release
5.0. Stata Corporation, College Station, TX.

Westorr, C. F, and A. BANKOLE. 1998. The time
dynamics of unmet need: An example from Morocco. Int. Fam. Plan. Pers. 24:12~14 and 24.

 
