Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

An “epidemic” model of sexual intercourse
prevalences for black and white adolescents

David C. Rowe , Joseph Lee Rodgers & Sylvia Meseck-Bushey

To cite this article: David C. Rowe , Joseph Lee Rodgers & Sylvia Meseck#Bushey (1989) An
“epidemic” model of sexual intercourse prevalences for black and white adolescents, Social
Biology, 36:3-4, 127-145, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1989.9988728

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1989.9988728

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

ee
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 1
»
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 3 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:43

 
 

An “Epidemic” Model
of Sexual Intercourse Prevalences
for Black and White Adolescents

 

"David C. Rowe, 'Joseph Lee Rodgers, and °Sylvia Meseck-Bushey

“School of Family and Consumer Resources, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona;
’Department of Psychology, University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma

ABSTRACT: In adolescence (12-16 years), the prevalence of sexual intercourse increases each
year. To explain the increasing yearly prevalences, we propose a recursive equation model of
onset of adolescent sexual intercourse. The model allows for an “epidemic” process (the
transmission of sexuality from a nonvirgin to a virgin) and a nonepidemic process (two virgins
progressing to sexual intercourse). The model also requires that virgin females be pubertally
mature before they will progress to sexual intercourse. Adequate fits were obtained to the
intercourse prevalences for both black and white respondents. Comparisons of alternative
models established that the full model was superior to models that omitted either the
nonepidemic process or the requirement of females’ pubertal maturation. The model was able
to fit both white and blacks simultaneously, assuming equal transition probabilities in both
races. Hence, we propose the hypothesis that race differences in sexual intercourse prevalences
may be strongly influenced by the age of initiation of the “epidemic” process and by race
difference in females’ rates of pubertal maturation. The results suggested that most new cases of
sexual intercourse arose from the epidemic process and that males were more prone to progress

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

to intercourse, given an opportunity.

A theoretical understanding of the
prevalences of sexual intercourse is an
important goal for the behavioral sciences. Early sexual activity carries the
health risk of contracting sexually transmitted diseases and infertility, and teenage pregnancy places a burden on young
mothers and their families that can endure across generations (Furstenberg et
al., 1987; Hayes, 1987). A theoretical
understanding of early sexual activity,
then, may provide a guide to public policy formation. From a purely scientific
point of view, this arena is a challenging
one for testing alternative behavioral
theories.

In this paper, we advance a new
quantitative theory of adolescent sexu
ality. This theory proposes that adolescent sexuality is partly transmitted by an
“epidemic” process analogous to the epidemic transmission of infectious diseases. Our theory makes explicit assumptions about the causal antecedents
of sexuality—including a greater emphasis on biology than most theories of
sexual behavior—and produces quantitative predictions for sexual intercourse
prevalences.

Our theory is designed to explain the
cumulative prevalences of sexual intercourse, that is, the proportion of individuals of a given age who have ever had
sexual intercourse. Not surprisingly, the
prevalence of sexual intercourse increases rapidly with age during adoles
127
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

128 Rowe et al.

cence until about half of adolescents in
the late teenage years report sexual intercourse (Zelnik et al., 1981). Two demographic differences are consistent
throughout the literature on teenage
sexuality. The male prevalence of sexual
intercourse is higher than the female,
and blacks’ prevalence is higher than
whites. The race difference is of scientific and practical interest because of its
historical persistence and magnitude,
especially in the early teenage years. In
Zelnik and Kantner’s (1980) national
survey, 65 per cent of never-married
black women 15-19 years reported having had sexual intercourse, compared to
only 42 per cent of white women. The
racial difference was greater at younger
ages. At age 15, 41 per cent of female
blacks had initiated intercourse, versus
18 per cent of female whites. Similarly,
during adolescence, prevalences of
pregnancy have been greater for black
than white women. This ratio was about
2:1 black to white births from years 15 to
19 years, but about 7:1 for black and
white women 14 years and below
(Washington, 1982). Some surveys report social class differences in sexual intercourse prevalences, with higher rates
among lower-class individuals, but these
differences are typically not as large as
those of sex and race.

Several types of theory attempt to explain the demographic facts of sexual intercourse prevalences. One type focuses
on socioeconomic variation in the opportunity costs of sexuality (Furstenberg, 1976). Opportunity costs refer to
the loss of future benefits entailed by a
particular behavioral decision. Applied
to adolescent sexual intercourse, lower
social class individuals may regard opportunity costs low because they perceive the chances of success from deferring for long-term goals (e.g.,

 

Social Biology

education) as minimal. In this case, factors such as educational aspirations,
school grades, school attendance, and
so on, should relate to sexual intercourse prevalences as individual difference variables and also explain social
class variation. Other indicators of social disadvantage (e.g., single parent
families) may also bear an association
with the opportunity costs of sexual intercourse.

A second type of theory uses variation in social norms to explain variation
in adolescent sexuality. Social norms are
the values regarding the appropriateness of sexual intercourse held by peers,
family members, and the teenagers
themselves. Individuals in peer groups
that approve more of sexual behavior
should themselves, according to this
view, be more likely to initiate early sexual activity.

Both types of theory explain some
variation in sexual intercourse among
teenagers; yet they have limitations.
Race differences are a particularly difficult problem for these theories. Furstenberg et al. (19875) tried to reduce
racial differences by statistically controlling variables tied to socioeconomic differences. Poor grades, school attendance, educational aspirations, and
related variables barely dented the 3.7
odds ratio of black:white sexual intercourse odds. Normative variables, however, were more successful. For example, respondents’ reports of friends’
intercourse reduced the odds ratio from
3.7 to 1.8; it was one of the few variables
to make a substantive difference.

Despite its empirical successes, normative theory does not necessarily give
theoretical insight, because the mechanisms that cause differences in community norms were left unspecified. Furstenberg et al. (1987) recognized that

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 36, No. 3-4

the normative explanation appears circular “in claiming that blacks have early
intercourse because other blacks (peers)
have early intercourse (p. 515).” The
unanswered, but essential, question is
what sustains different social norms in
different communities. Such a question
naturally promotes a search for “third
variables” that would explain both high
prevalences of sexual intercourse and
approving community norms. Although
one explanation might be historical—
communities receive different social traditions which they then maintain (Washington, 1982)}—it would be more satisfying to find some functional reason
for the persistence of disparate norms.

Biology has been relatively neglected
in discussions of the determinants of
sexual intercourse in adolescence; yet
pubertal development takes place during this period. In both sexes, with males
lagging behind females by about two
years, pubertal development produces
changes in appearance as adolescents
acquire secondary sexual characteristics. In the body, these changes are promoted by an order-of-magnitude
change of testosterone levels in males
and by substantial changes in estrogen
and androgen levels (of adrenal origin)
in females. A biological theory of adolescent sexuality postulates that the concomitant increase in sexual activity during this age period is a consequence of
pubertal influence on sexual libido;
physical changes may cause adolescents
to desire sexual activity. Later, opportunities will come.

Udry’s Adolescent Sexuality Project
provides the first strong evidence for
such biological theorizing (Smith et al.,
1985). This research has involved studies of Tanner’s stage levels—the level of
breast and genital development in females and genital development in

An “Epidemic”’ Model

129

males—and studies of hormones. In
their study of pubertal] maturation, both
girls’ and boys’ level of puberty were related to sexual behavior (intercourse
and sexual experience) independent of
age (Smith et al., 1985). In girls, growth
affected most by androgenic hormones
(pubic hair) correlated more highly with
sexual behavior than growth affected
most by estrogens (breast development). This result suggested that the effect of physical development was a direct one on sexual behavior, rather than
an indirect one mediated by adolescent
peers’ perception of a women’s level of
pubertal development. In girls, the relationship between pubertal maturation
and sexuality also interacted with the influence of same-sex friends. Women
with low levels of pubertal maturity
were unlikely to engage in sexual behaviors, regardless of their friends‘ sexual
experience level, but women who were
pubertally mature were affected by
same-sex friends’ sexuality. Those with
more sexually active friends were themselves more likely to be sexually active.
In these two studies, the samples consisted of white respondents only; but
two research projects indicate a relationship between pubertal maturation
events and initiation of sexual activity in
blacks (Presser, 1978; Zabin et al.,
1986).

Hormone levels in blood appear to
affect sexual behavior (Udry et al.,
1985, 1986). Males’ level of free testosterone predicted sexual intercourse,
sexual experience (petting behaviors
short of intercourse), and sexual arousability. Hormones appeared to work
through a biologically-based change in
sexual motivation, as neither age nor
pubertal appearance changes could account statistically for the hormonesexuality relationship. In females, a
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

 

130 Rowe et al.

number of sexual interest and activity
variables, except for intercourse itself,
were predicted from adrenal origin androgenic hormones. Estrogenic hormones, which affect visible secondary
sexual traits in females, were unassociated with sexual behavior. The lack of
prediction of sexual intercourse may be
partly a problem of statistical power; 11
in a sample of 78 white females reported
intercourse. As in males, neither age
nor secondary sexual traits mediated the
relationships. Both studies counter the
prevailing view that sexual activity is
merely the result of social norms or adolescents’ reactions to physical changes in
others. Instead, hormonal changes appeared to produce a sexual libido responsible for sexuality. No evidence exists for the reverse causation that sexual
activity affects hormonal levels in females.

Because blacks mature pubertally
earlier than whites, a biological model
can be applied to race differences. Nationally, blacks attain menarche earlier
than whites (Harlan et al., 1980). Age of
menarche, however, may be less important than the overall level of pubertal
maturation. For example, increases in
pubertal hormones considerably antedate menarche in girls (Udry et al.,
1986). Black girls progress through
Tanner’s stages of pubertal growth considerably earlier than white girls
(Harlan et al., 1980). According to the
National Health Examination Survey,
this racial difference is independent of
age at menarche and social class, suggesting that it is a biologically based racial difference. There is also a suggestion of differences in follicle stimulating
hormone levels in black and white girls
(Nankin et al., 1974), with black girls
having higher levels. In contrast, the
data for males are conflicting. The Na
Social Biology

tional Health Survey suggests equal
rates of pubertal maturation in black
and white males down to age 12 years,
but two other studies, also employing
observer ratings of pubertal maturation,
indicate black males were ahead of
white males under age 14 years (Nankin
et al., 1974; Foster et al., 1977). Although the maturational difference between whites and blacks may be partly
responsible for their different prevalences of sexual intercourse, a test of
maturational effects requires an explicit
model of the social processes determining the spread of intercourse among
adolescents, as we discuss next.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
STATEMENT OF THE MODEL

In this paper, we describe a theoretical model of the initiation of sexual intercourse. This model takes as data the
cumulative prevalences of sexual intercourse, namely, the proportion of adolescents of a given race or sex who have
ever had sexual intercourse with a partner. The model will contain two terms,
one representing an “epidemic” process
of the transmission of sexual intercourse
and the other representing a nonepidemic process of two virgin partners
having sexual intercourse together. In
both processes, we assume that for a female to participate in sexual intercourse, she must be pubertally mature.
We also assume that a single probability
exists that describes the chance that an
individual will initiate intercourse, given
an encounter with a nonvirgin partner.
This probability may differ for males
and females, but is assumed to be constant over the period 12-16 years.

In the theory of infectious disease,
epidemics are spread by face-to-face en
 

 

 
 

Vol. 36, No. 3-4

counters between an infected individual
and a susceptible individual. These theories also assume “homogeneous” mixing, that is, that encounters between infected and susceptible individuals are at
random. Given these simplifying assumptions, the rate of spread depends
only on the proportion of the population
already infected. This transmission
process can be described by differential
or difference equations (see CavalliSforza and Feldman, 1981 for applications of such models to social phenomena).
In our analogy, nonvirgins are the
“carriers” of sexual intercourse and virgins are the susceptible individuals. We
begin by assuming that encounters between individuals occur randomly.
Later, we will examine the consequences of relaxing this assumption.
Under random assortment, in a population with proportions Pm of male nonvirgins and Pf of female nonvirgins, the
probabilities of two opposite-sexed individuals encountering one another are
Pm (1- Pf), Pf (1- Pm), and (1 - Pf) (1Pm), for an encounter between non= virgin males and virgin females, non‘y virgin females and virgin males, and vir3 gin females and virgin males,
< respectively. Because we assume that
= only pubertally mature females will iniQ tiate sexual activity, we reduce the number of pairs by the proportion of mature
females of a given age (M,, where tis an
age from 12 to 16 years). Finally, not all
encounters of partners lead to sexual intercourse. The following two recursive
equations include this restriction using
the parameters T and k and define our
model:

(1) Pm,.1= Pm,+Tm

Pf, +
kM, (1 - Pm,) (1 - Pf)

Sea of er at 13:43 08 December 2015

a

(1 - Pm,)

An “Epidemic” Model 131

(2) Pfrii = Pf, + TfM,
Pm, +
kM, (1- Pm,) (1- Pf),

where fis the age period (i.e., 12 years,
13 years, etc.); Pm is the proportion of
male nonvirgins; Pfis the proportion of
female nonvirgins; M, is the proportion
of pubertally mature females at age t;
Tm is the transition probability (per encounter) that a male virgin will engage in
sexual intercourse, given an encounter
with a nonvirgin female; Tf is the transition probability (per encounter) that a
female virgin will engage in sexual intercourse, given an encounter with a nonvirgin male; and k is the probability that
two nonvirgins will engage in intercourse per encounter (a nonepidemic
process).!

(1 - Pf)

ASSUMPTIONS OF THE MODEL

We limited the spread of sexual intercourse to pubertally mature females for
empirical reasons. As reviewed earlier,
Udry’s research found that pubertal
maturation was associated with females’
initiation of sexual behavior. Although
the same association was found for
males, males will initiate intercourse
earlier in pubertal development than females. In particular, some black males
initiate coitus very early, even prior to
puberty (Clark et al., 1984; Finkel and

1The parameters 7 and k can be given another
interpretation. Our interpretation is that they refer
to the probability of a virgin making the transition
to nonvirginity, given a single encounter per year.
However, T also can represent the number of “effective” encounters per person per year. An “effective” encounter is one between a virgin and
nonvirgin (or two virgins) leading to sexual intercourse. Effective encounters are the product of the
probability of transmission per encounter times tota] number of encounters. The latter interpretation
is the standard “mass action’’ principle of transmission in epidemic theory (Anderson, 1982, p. 154).

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

132 Rowe et al.

Finkel, 1975). Thus, although male sexual activity varies with puberty and with
hormonal levels, a lack of pubertal development is not as restrictive on male
sexual behavior as it is on female behavior. Data on this issue will be presented
later.

The random assortment assumption,
on the surface, appears to counter

' friendship homogamy and influence

theories. Studies in the behavioral sciences indicate friendship homogamy for
different social attitudes and behaviors
(Kandel, 1978). Certainly, the virginity
status of opposite-sex friends might be
correlated, because of social and influence or social selection processes.
Billy and Udry (1985) have investigated
the effect of best same-sex and oppositesex friends’ intercourse behavior on the
likelihood that virgin respondents will
make the transition to sexual intercourse. In agreement with our random
assortment assumption, they found no
influence of either friends on the likelihood that white males or blacks make
the transition. On the other hand, white
females were influenced somewhat by
the intercourse behavior of their best
friends.

Because the “random assortment”
assumption may be unrealistic, we will
investigate the effects of relaxing it.
Thus, we will permit a correlation between the intercourse statuses of
opposite-sex friends to account for
friendship similarity. In fact, this correlation will over-adjust to the extent that
opposite-sex best friends are correlated
because they have had intercourse together. That process is dynamically accounted for by the model. The part of
the correlation reflecting “non-random
encounters” is what we wish to adjust
for. As we cannot empirically separate
these two components of resemblance,

Social Biology

we will use a range of possible values of
nonrandom assortment. In addition, we
have data directly bearing on this issue,
as we shall see later.

We also assume that the transition
probabilities, Tm for males and Tf for
females, remain constant across individuals and across the age 12-16 period.
This assumption is sufficient to fit the
kind of aggregate data we have available, but it is undoubtedly a simplification. Itis more likely that a range of individual differences in transition
proneness exist, depending on differences in personality and experience. Tm
and 7f, then, represent something like
the mean value on the 7m and Tf distributions across individuals. The average
proneness may remain fairly constant
across these years; and enough individuals may have Tm and Tf values close to
the mean so that the approximation will
suffice. It is important to note that a constant 7m and 7f allows for changes in
the conditional probability of engaging
in intercourse, given age. This probability is greater for older than younger adolescents. However, this change in conditional probability accords with the
model because (1) among older adolescents, the prevalence of females’ pubertal maturity has increased, and (2)
among older adolescents, the risk of encountering a nonvirgin who can “transmit” sexual intercourse is greater. Tm
and 7f are themselves probabilities conditioned on encountering a nonvirgin individual, and for any person, they can
remain relatively constant during the
age 12-16 period.

EVALUATION OF THE MODEL

To evaluate our hypotheses, we

adopt the strategy of comparing the ade
quacy of competing models. The raw
data will consist of sexual intercourse

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 36, No. 3-4

prevalences, grouped by sex and race,
for adolescents 12~16 years old. We will
test the fit of models to the data from
each race separately, and then to data
from the combined races of blacks and
whites. We will sequentially test
models, comparing purely epidemic
models (i.e., without the virgin-virgin
term) with mixed models combining
both nonvirgin-virgin and virgin-virgin
terms. Within each category, we will
compare models that include the females’ pubertal maturation restriction
with models that do not impose this restriction.

METHOD

Data set—The “epidemic” model
was fit to data on sexual intercourse
prevalences from the Adolescent Sexuality (ADSEX) data set collected by the
Carolina Population Center between
1978 and 1982. The ADSEX project
surveyed complete intact schools in two
metropolitan areas: Raleigh, North
Carolina, and Tallahassee, Florida. The
school setting is especially powerful for
testing the epidemic model because the
face-to-face transmission process is directly reflected in the data. National
samples of adolescents would be more
statistically representative of the population but would involve noninteracting
youths. Subjects were interviewed and
administered questionnaires in their
homes. The original response rate was
above 80 per cent in both Raleigh and
Tallahassee. In Raleigh, there were
three rounds of data collection; in Tallahassee, two rounds. The rate of retention was above 80 per cent throughout
the longitudinal rounds. We combined
the different rounds and locations of the
ADSEX study to maximize our sample
size at each age point. Hence, somewhat
different youths were included in the

An “Epidemic” Model

133

sample at different age points, although
high proportions of the sample were
represented in the full longitudinal
process.

Separate data sets were constructed
in the following way. The 12- and 13year-old groups consisted of two rounds
of data: Round 1 at Raleigh and Round
1 at Tallahassee. The 14-year-old group
consisted of four rounds, the first two
rounds at both locations. Each of the 15and 16-year-old data sets incorporated
three rounds: Raleigh, Rounds 2 and 3;
and Tallahassee, Round 2.

RESULTS
DATA TABLES

Our analyses focused on sexual intercourse. Each respondent was asked
twice in the questionnaire whether they
had had sexual intercourse. One question was simply a yes/no response to a
single item asking whether the respondent had ever had sexual intercourse.
This item included a definition of intercourse and equivalent slang terms. The
other item was a question concerned
with the frequency of sexual intercourse. A minority of youths (<5 per
cent) contradicted themselves by giving
conflicting answers to the two questions
(see Rodgers et al., 1982, for a discussion of this problem). These individuals
were recorded as virgins.

Table 1 presents the intercourse
prevalences by race and sex. The prevalences, as expected, differed widely
among these groups. At age 12, 4-6
times the percentage of blacks had initiated sexual intercourse as whites.
Within race, about four times the percentage of males as females were sexually active. Although racial and sexual
disparities diminished with age, they did
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

 

134 Rowe et al. Social Biology
TABLE 1
SEXUAL INTERCOURSE PREVALENCES BY AGE?
AGE
Group 12 13 14 15 16
Whites
BOYS ........ cece eee eaee 11.5 19.6 27.4 41.7 50.3
(113) (204) (314) (199) (169)
Girls 2.0... cc cee ee eee eee 2.1 4.1 11.2 24.5 34.3
(207) (196) (347) (184) (216)
Blacks
BOYS ssesseaus gaug pe canes 40.0 57.6 61.0 79.1 78.4
(35) (59) (146) (67) (97)
Girls 2.0... cece ee eee 11.5 22.2 27.8 52.0 $9.5
(61) (63) (144) (77) (84)

*Sample size in parentheses.

not converge. At 16 years, prevalences
were about 20-30 per cent greater in
males than in females, and in blacks
than in whites.

We next examined the relationship
between sexual intercourse and pubertal maturation. Each questionnaire contained black and white line drawings to
represent pubertal growth stages,
adapted from Tanner’s (1978) photographs of pubertal maturation stages.
Respondents made two self ratings:
girls, breast and pubic hair stage; boys,
penis and pubic hair stage. Scores on
each self-rating ranged from 1 to 5 and
were averaged. Table 2 presents the relationship between pubertal level and
sexual intercourse status. In calculating
the tabled values, we combined intermediate pubertal levels (1.5, 2.5, etc.)
with the next lowest stage level. The table presents together several immature
levels with relatively small sample sizes
(Levels 1-3) and compares them to two
mature levels (Level 4, and adult maturity, Level 5, combined).

In both black and white males, individuals with low pubertal statuses reported sexual intercourse. In particular,

black males (63 per cent, intercourse)
clearly violated the assumption that pubertal maturation was a prerequisite for
sexual intercourse.

On the other hand, in the two female
groups, sexual intercourse status was
positively associated with pubertal
growth (in whites, an increase from 7
per cent to 29 per cent; in blacks, an increase from 32 per cent to 49 per cent).
Hence, these data were somewhat inconsistent with our assumption that im
TABLE 2

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PUBERTAL
MATURATION AND NONVIRGINITY STATUS

 

TANNER’S STAGES
Group 1-3 4-5
Females
Black ..........6- 32% 49%
(63) (278)
White ...........6.- 71% 29%
(132) (546)
Males
Black ...........2.. 63% 71%
(70) (343)
White ..sccccecsnss 20% 46%
(148) (716)

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

An “Epidemic” Model

135

TABLE 3
FEMALE PREVALENCES OF PUBERTAL MATURITY

Vol. 36, No. 34
Group 12
Females
Whites .............200ee 36%
Blacks ...... cc. c cece eee 53%

mature individuals do not report intercourse. The lack of a perfect association
of pubertal status with coitus must,
therefore, introduce some error into our
model—namely, the 29 (20 black and 9
white) females in Stages 1-3 who reported coitus. However, if some of these
females had intercourse through situations outside the model, for instance,
because they were victims of rape or
child molestation, then our behavioral
data may be closer to no (voluntary) sexual intercourse for pubertally immature
females than they suggest on the surface. We took advantage of the positive
association of pubertal status and females’ coitus by incorporating females’
pubertal level into our recursive equation model.

Table 3 indicates the proportion of
fernales who were pubertally mature at
each age. A significant racial difference
showing earlier maturation in black girls
occurred at age 12 years (17 per cent,
z= 2.3, p <0.05). In the National
Health Examination Survey (Harlan et
al., 1980), racial differences in pubertal
growth remained statistically significant
through 17 years, although the magnitude of the difference was quite small after age 14 years.

MOobDEL FITTING

The model-fitting routine accepted
the age-12 sexual] intercourse prevalences as starting values and then calcu
62%
67%

AGE

13 14 15 16
80% 95% 93%
82% 88% 93%

lated sexual intercourse prevalences for
ages 13-16 years using recursive equations 1 and 2. An optimization routine
(Loehlin, 1987, p. 229-231) was used
that selected parameter values to minimize a chi-square calculated from the
difference of the observed minus expected frequencies of sexual intercourse
divided by the expected frequencies.
This routine started with trial values of
Tm; the male transition probability, 7f,;
the female transition probability; and k
(except in models where k = 0). Because the routine found local minimums, it was modified so that separate
searches were carried out for different
values of k in which a bisecting search
pattern selected new trial values of k until the true minimum was located. for
models containing the female maturation component, the percentage of mature females given in Table 3 were entered into Equation 2. For models
omitting the maturation component, the
percentage mature was set equal to 1.0.
When fit to one racial group, the
model had eight independent observations, which were used to estimate three
parameters (7m, Tf, k). Hence, there
were five degrees of freedom with which
to test this model statistically. The minimized chi square was for the males and
females combined. When the nonepidemic term was omitted (i.e., when
k = 0), the model estimated two parameters, yielding six degrees of freedom.

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

136 Rowe et al.

When fit to voth racial groups, Tm
was constrained to equality for black
and white males; 7f to equality for black
and white females; and k to equality for
both races. The minimized chi square
was the chi square for all groups combined. In this condition, sixteen observations were available, and three parameters were estimated. Hence, the
model had thirteen degrees of freedom.
Omitting the nonepidemic term (k = 0)
increased the degrees of freedom by one
(df = 14). In all cases, asmall chi square
value was desirable because it indicated
small discrepancies among predicted
and actual sexual intercourse prevalences.

Table 4 displays the results of comparing the statistical adequacy of purely
epidemic models (k = 0) and mixed

Social Biology

models (k>0). A purely epidemic
model without maturation was statistically rejected (chi square p value
<0.05) for whites and whites plus
blacks, but it was accepted for blacks
(x? = 5.0, p > 0.05). Surprisingly, the
purely epidemic model with maturation
of females was rejected in two of the
three statistical tests. Moreover, this
model required high transition probabilities for males (Tm = 1) and females
(Tf > 0.46). Given the lack of fit of these
models, the addition of the virgin-virgin
nonepidemic term was deemed necessary (i.e., kK > 0).

The first set of three models contained the virgin-virgin term but omitted
the female maturation parameter (™,).
This model, although not rejected at the
0.05 level, gave a weaker fit for whites

TABLE 4
MODEL FirtinG FOR WHITES, BLACKS, AND RACES COMBINED

Model xt df
Pure epidemic
No maturation
| 27.690 6
I opeeeees G5 Fae 4.649 6
W+B......... 46.106 14
Maturation
| 37.687 6
Ty pees #ua6 ea 4.174 6
W+B......... 62.780 14
Mixed Model
No maturation
W ..ceececaees 9.554 5
Bocce cee ce eee 4.332 5
W+B°........ 14.048 13
Maturation
W ccc c cece eens 5.690 5
B uganen5aads » 3.316 5
W+B......... 10.275 3813

*;R = reject, p < 0.05; A = accept, p > 0.05,

>: Females, X? = 9.832 (df = 5),p < 0.1.

Statistical

Tu TF k Adequacy?

1.0 0.50 0

1.0 0.308 0 A

1.0 0.48 0

1.0 0.90 0 R

1.0 0.46 0 R

1.0 0.70 0 R

1.0 0.231 0.038 p<0.1
0.961 0.259 0.037 A

1.0 0.250 0.036 A
0.899 0.221 0.100 A
0.779 0.306 0.137 A

1.0 0.329 0.080 A

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 36, No. 3-4

(x? = 9.554, df = 5, p<0.1). In the
combined group, the overall chi square
was nonsignificant (x? = 14.048,
df = 13, p>0.05). However, this chi
square consisted of two independent chi
squares, one from the male prevalences
(4.216) and the other from the female
prevalences (9.832). The fit to these female prevalences was weaker, as the chi
square was nearly significant (p <0.1)
with five degrees of freedom (eight female observations and three estimated
parameters, 7m, Tf, and k).

Adding female maturation to the
equations improved the model fits in
each case. The chi square values were
nonsignificant for whites (5.7), blacks
(3.3), and the races together (10.3).
The transition probabilities were
greater for males than females (7m
whites = 0.899, 7m blacks = 0.779; Tf
whites = 0.221; Tf blacks = 0.306).
All probabilities were fairly similar for
the two races, including nonepidemic

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

Prevalences

11 12 13 14

Age

 

An “Epidemic” Model 137

transition probability (k whites
= 0.100; & blacks = 0.137). Figures 1
and 2 graph the predicted versus obtained sexual intercourse prevalences
using the model fits done for blacks and
whites, respectively.

The comparison of the combined
group (whites plus blacks) with the sum
of the races fit separately can test for the
equality of 7m, Tf, and k for black and
white racial groups, This test has three
degrees of freedom (the difference of 10
degrees of freedom for the races fit separately and 13 dfs for the races combined). This chi square failed to reach
significance (x?= 1.269, df = 3,
p > 0.05). That similar values of Tm, Tf,
and k could satisfy the prevalences from
the races combined was understandable
given the fairly similar values obtained
when the races were fit separately. In
the combined solution, however, 7m
had the somewhat undesirable property
of attaining an upper bound

<< Black Males
© Black Females

Observed

+ Black Males
x Black Females

15 16 17

Fic, 1.—Best-fitting sexual intercourse prevalences in blacks.
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

138 Rowe et al. Social Biology
Whites
100
90 .
Predicted
80 -* White Males
g 70 ~~ White Females
A 60
2 50 + Observed
40 + White Males
i x White Females
30
20 +
10
0
11 12 13 14 15 16 17

Age

Fic. 2.—Best-fitting sexual intercourse prevalences in whites.

(Tm = 1.0). The transition probability
also increased for females (7f = 0.329).

Because 7m > Tf, given an encounter with a nonvirgin, males would be
more likely to have coitus with the partner than females. This result, of course,
reflects the greater prevalence of intercourse in males than females. These values of 7m and 7f assume that just one
pairing has occurred in the year; hence,
they are unrealistically high. The probability per encounter is certainly lower;
for example, if an average of five encounters with opposite-sex friends who
could potentially participate in intercourse per year occurred, then 7m
would equal 0.2 and Tf would equal
0.066 for the solution using all four
groups (whites + blacks).

To test whether the model was
merely a general mathematical expression of developmental growth, we also
fit the mixed model with maturation on
artificial four-group data and on fourgroup ADSEX smoking prevalence

data. The model statistically rejected
the smoking prevalences, a number of
combinations of purely linear increases
in prevalences, and logistic increases
that differed by race but not by sex.
These fésults suggest that the mixed
model was relatively specific to the type
of process postulated; for example, it
was superior to any purely epidemic
model of sexual intercotirse transmission.

THE ASSUMPTION OF RANDOM
ASSORTMENT

Thus far, the mixed model has required the assumption that opposite-sex
partners meet at random with regard to
their prior sexual activity. The ADSEX
data set included information on the
person named by each respondent as his
or her best opposite-sex friend. Hence,
we can calculate the Phi coefficient (the
correlation for dichotomous data) for
the coital status of opposite-sex friends.
These correlations at least give a rough

 
a aaa a a

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Vol. 36, No. 3—4 An “Epidemic’’ Model 139
TABLE 5
EFFECT OF CORRELATION OF PARTNER’S SEXUAL STATUS ON MODEL Fits
Phi and Group Tu Tr k x?

Phi 0.00

Whites ............ 0.899 0.221 0.100 5.690

Blacks ............-. 0.779 0.306 0.137 3.316
Phi 0.05

Whites ............ 0.932 0.212 0.104 5.840

Blacks ...........24. 0.756 0.293 0.156 3.376
Phi 0.10

Whites ............ 0.985 0.205 0.106 6.011

Blacks ............. 0.902 0.293 0.157 3.399
Phi 0.15

Whites ............ 1.00 0.185 0.113 6.222

Blacks .........-.4. 0.928 0.282 0.172 3.447
Phi 0.20

Whites ............ 1.00 0.159 0.12 6.486

BIACKS cake vs 0a ees 0.910 0.259 0.197 3.524
Phi 0.25

Whites ............ 1.00 0.13 0.127 6.797

Blacks ............. 0.759 0.20 0.25 3.69
Phi 0.30

Whites ............ 1.00 0.102 0.134 7.174

Blacks ............. 0.884 0,197 0.250 3.735

idea of the possible violation of the random assortment assumption. They
place an upper bound on the violation of
the assumption, because a part of
friends’ resemblance may be due to the
initiation of sexual activity subsequent
to the encounter of the two individuals.

Phi coefficients were calculated for
white males with best female friend
(Phi = 0.15); white females with best
male friend (Phi = 0.11); black males
with best female friend (Phi = -0.08);
and black females with best male friend
(Phi = -0.12). These correlations were
unexpectedly small. The negative Phi
coefficients for blacks were totally unanticipated; they reflected a high prevalence of intercourse in this population,
such that even considerable (about 30

per cent of all pairings) nonvirginnonvirgin pairings failed to produce a
- positive association. Although we cannot be sure that the opposite-sex friend
was always the sexual partner of the respondent, these low values support our
random assortment assumption.
Nonetheless, we decided to explore
the effect of one possible violation of
this assumption—a positive assortment
for sexual intercourse status—on the
performance of the mixed model with
maturation. The recursive equations
were modified to replace the random assortment probabilities with probabilities
based on a given value of the Phi assortment coefficient. Table 5 fits the model
using Pm and Pf as marginal values from
which the probability of virgin males
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

140 Rowe et al.

paired with nonvirgin females, virgin females paired with nonvirgin males, and
virgins paired together was calculated,
given Phi. Hence, at each cycle of calculation, nonrandom assortment probabilities were substituted for the random
ones, assuming that the value of the assortment correlation remained constant
at ages 12-16 years.

The main conclusion from Table 5,
showing the parameter estimates and
chi square values for different assumed
correlations, is that violations of the assumption in this range have surprisingly
little effect. The models including a correlation fit worse than the random assortment model, but this deterioration
occurred relatively slowly. Transition
probabilities for males gradually increased, transition probabilities for females gradually decreased, as did the k
transition probability. These changes
reflected the effect of correlated intercourse status, which was to increase
both the numbers of nonvirginnonvirgin and virgin-virgin pairings; the
latter, but not the former, appeared in
the model. Hence, we saw an increase in
k’s value, as more virgin-virgin pairs
were present to contribute to the transition process. Why were the changes in
parameter values relatively small ones?
Partly, because the marginal distributions limited consequences of any correlation. There were few nonvirginnonvirgin pairings to begin with.
Correlations under 0.20 changed the
proportions in different pairings, but by
only a few per cent; hence, the similarity
of random assortment and low correlation models. Given that we do not know
what actual correlation males and females have for their coitus status, a random assortment assumption will remain
a practical way to obtain fairly accurate
parameter estimates.

 

Social Biology

DISCUSSION
SUMMARY OF MODEL PROPERTIES

Sexual intercourse prevalences increase rapidly during adolescence. We
have provided a theoretical model, derived from the theory of epidemic infectious disease, to describe the spread of
onset of coitus among adolescents. Our
model assumed that intercourse is
spread by the contact of individuals and
that virgins and nonvirgins of both sexes
come into contact randomly. Under
these conditions, the probability that a
youth will engage in intercourse depends on the proportion of nonvirgin
youths. The greater the fraction of sexually active youths, the greater the possibility of spread. The model included an
“epidemic” process whereby a virgin experienced first intercourse with a nonvirgin (the “carrier” of sexual intercourse). Our model also included a
nonepidemic process whereby virgin
males and females encounter one another and progress to sexual intercourse. In both processes, pubertally
immature females were excluded from
initiating sexual intercourse. Starting
with coitus prevalences at age 12, our
mixed model, combining the epidemic
term of nonvirgin-virgin encounters and
the nonepidemic term of virgin encounters, successfully predicted intercourse
prevalences for ages 13-16 years.

We explored the validity of the assumptions of the mixed model by comparing it to alternative models. Some of
these models were “‘nested” within the
mixed model and so could be tested with
fewer degrees of freedom. Thus, we established empirically that the virginvirgin encounter term was necessary,
because omitting it led to a statistical rejection of the model. A purely “epidemic” model, involving the “‘transmisDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Vol. 36, No. 3—4

sion” of sexual intercourse only from
nonvirgins to virgins, was unable to fit
the data. Nevertheless, the “epidemic”
component of the model does contribute the most to the spread of coitus, because the probability, k, that two virgins
progress to coitus (per encounter) was
only about 0.1.

Model comparisons were also used to
evaluate the maturational hypothesis.
Based on empirical data showing that females’ prevalences of coitus increased
substantially with pubertal maturation,
a limitation was imposed that only pubertally mature females could progress
to sexual intercourse. Although these
models were not nested hierarchically,
the mixed model with a maturation component provided a better fit than the
mixed model omitting a maturation
component. Moreover, the maturation
component improved the fit when the
model was applied to both black and
white respondents in a single analysis.
The earlier sexual maturation of black
girls than white girls absorbed some of
the racial difference in coitus prevalences.

The model required an assumption
that encounters between sexual partners
occurred at random with regard to sexual intercourse status. This assumption,
although on the surface seemingly implausible, was supported by the empirical correlations of best opposite-sex
friends’ sexual intercourse statuses.
These correlations were quite weak. A
second analysis examined the consequences of relaxing the random assortment assumption. For correlations less
than 0.3, the fit of the model was gradually worsened, but slowly enough to suggest that it was quite robust to minor violations of the random assortment
assumption. Hence, although this was a
simplifying assumption, random assort
An “Epidemic” Model 141

ment will produce, under a range of conditions, reasonable parameter estimates
and close approximations to observed
coitus prevalences.

THEORETICAL IMPLICATIONS

This model differs from other explanations of adolescent sexual intercourse
in several ways. First, it places a heavy
emphasis on biological maturation as
the proximal determinant of sexual intercourse. Puberty is a genetically timed
biological event that itself increases sexual libido and drive. Research by Udry
and his colleagues demonstrates that
libido—indexed by hormonal levels—
has a direct effect on sexual arousal and
drive, independent of physical appearance factors that might mediate social
reactions to individuals, and independent of age. The model included this biological component in its restriction that
pubertally immature females would not
progress to sexual intercourse. We assume that they lack sexual motivation
and desire because of their hormonal
immaturity.

Second, it attributes new cases of sexual intercourse directly to social interactions among adolescents. In the analogy
to infectious disease, intercourse can
only occur after an encounter of two individuals, and it spreads in only one direction (it makes no sense to say that virgins “give” virginity to a nonvirgin).
The parameter values tn the model were
estimated assuming that only one social
encounter leading to intercourse occurs
in a year, Such an assumption was
clearly unrealistic because more than a
single opportunity is likely to occur in a
year’s time. Tm and Tf, the probabilities
that a nonvirgin “transmits” intercourse
to a virgin, given an encounter, therefore must exceed their true values.
Nonetheless, this model draws attention
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

142 Rowe et al.

to the proportion of nonvirgins and the
frequency of social interactions as themselves factors serving to increase transitions to nonvirginity.

From this perspective, several puzzling findings about sexual intercourse
prevalences can be given new interpretations. We hypothesize that the racial
difference in coitus prevalence may
result from an earlier “initiation” of the
“epidemic” process in the black than in
the white community. In our results, females were the main source of restraint
on the spread of sexual intercourse, because pubertally immature females were
seen as unlikely to engage in coitus and
because the female transition probability (7f, the probability of a virgin’s progressing to intercourse, given an encounter with a nonvirgin), about 0.3,
was lower than that of males, about 0.8.
Our model could fit the sexual intercourse prevalences at age 13-16 for
blacks and whites simultaneously, with
equal transition probabilities and allowing for the differential maturation rates
of black and white girls. The model cannot itself demonstrate that the epidemic
process was initiated earlier in the black
sample. However, the higher prevalences for blacks than whites at age 12
suggests earlier initiation among blacks.
At age 12, 17 per cent more black than
white females were mature, and this relative difference would only increase if
the maturation curves were extrapolated to younger ages. Given that the
conditions exist in the black sample for
early initiation—namely, a larger pool
of sexually receptive females, we can
speculate that the racial difference may
be the result of a difference in the timing
of the “‘epidemic”’ process.

Furstenberg et al., (1987) found that
blacks’ coitus prevalences were lower in
integrated high schools than in all black

 

Social Biology

high schools. In light of our model, this
result might be interpreted in terms of
the frequencies of opposite-sex social
encounters. Assuming most individuals
experience their first coitus with someone of the same race, cross-race social
encounters would not lead to intercourse. However, if these encounters
require time and effort, then they
should reduce the rate at which withinrace social encounters occur, and hence
they should also reduce rate of spread of
sexual intercourse from nonvirgins to
virgins.

The model does not deal directly with
social norms regarding sexual intercourse. In our model, Tm and Tf may
partly reflect social norms favorable or
unfavorable toward sexual intercourse.
Yet, race differences were lacking. That
is, given an opportunity for sexual intercourse, blacks were no more likely to
engage in sexual intercourse than
whites. Some social norms might be regarded as consequences rather than
causes of coitus. For example, if, in the
black community, adolescents hold
norms that are more favorable to early
parenthood and early coitus, these relative normative differences may simply
reflect the reality of these actual differences and not constitute their determinants. It is difficult to apply normative
pressure against a behavior that is engaged in by half or more of 15-year-old
boys and girls. Hence, the ‘“‘epidemic’”’
spread of coitus may be a factor in the
weakening of normative pressures
against coitus.

CAVEATS AND LIMITATIONS

Although we believe that considerable potential exists for new applications
and extensions of this basic model, it
does possess several limitations. The
model dealt with aggregate data and
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Vol. 36, No. 3-4

therefore neglected individual-difference factors. The opportunity-cost
model is consistent with individual differences in proneness toward coitus.
Adolescents who perceive that the delay
of coitus will bring few future rewards,
such as security and income, will more
likely engage in intercourse than those
perceiving higher opportunity costs.
Such reasoning leads to the implication
that the values of 7m and Tf will differ
widely among individuals; that is, given
a virgin’s encounter with a nonvirgin,
there should be a range of transition
probabilities to nonvirginity. Earlier,
we suggested that Tm and 7f be regarded as the means of a distribution of
transition probabilities. To test such
ideas, prevalence data would be needed
for subgroups of the populations varying
in Opportunity costs. Presumably, the
basic mixed model would apply to all
subgroups, but 7m and Tf would be unequal among them. We see much to gain
from modeling the probabilities of individuals of different types making transitions, instead of modeling aggregate
data.

The model also does not deal directly
with questions of selection or influence.
At an individual level, a virgin boy or
virgin girl might want intercourse and so
actively look for someone similarly predisposed. Conversely, a nonvirgin might
actively pressure a virgin into sexual intercourse; survey data suggest that
“date rape” has a surprisingly high prevalence. Finally, opportunities for intercourse may come by happenstance, and
the reaction of an individual to the opportunity might depend on proneness
and on temporary situational factors.
The model we have proposed is really
moot on the exact social process leading
to coitus in individual cases, and a mixture of selection, influence, and happen
An “Epidemic” Model 143

stance processes would be invisible to
the model as we have proposed it.
Nonetheless, the nature of this process
is a Separate research topic of considerable importance.

In closing, we caution that our analogy between epidemic infectious disease
and coitus is neither literal comparison
nor a moral prescription. The infectious
disease model was chosen simply because it provides a tractable mathematical description of a transmission process
between well-defined statuses; moreover, our best fitting model was not even
purely “epidemic,” since it contained a
nonepidemic term within it. Our analogy should not be misinterpreted as implying a moral position regarding premarital coitus among teenagers. It is
rather a useful, plausible, and empirically defensible deScription of what
might be occurring in adolescent
groups.

CONCLUSIONS

The mixed model successfully predicted the prevalences of sexual intercourse for adolescents 13-16 years old.
Although the model is (by definition) a
simplification of social life, its assumptions of maturationally influenced female “risk,” randomly pairing sexual
partners, and occasional transition of
virgin pairs to nonvirginity received empirical support. The intercourse prevalences at age 12 were high in all groups,
except white females; hence, considerable “epidemic” spread may have occurred at younger ages. Although undoubtedly difficult to collect, data are
much needed on the sexual behavior of
children under 12 years old.

The “epidemic” process provided a
new hypothesis for racial differences.
This hypothesis is that racial differences
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

144

in pubertal maturation rates, with earlier maturation among blacks than white
girls, may lead to an earlier initiation of
the social transmission of coitus among
blacks, with a consequent snowballing
effect on coitus prevalences at later
ages. Although cultural factors may
contribute to race differences in sexual
behavior, this maturationally based interpretation can avoid moral implications (e.g., undesirable social norms,
parental neglect) concerning the black
community, as implied by other theories
of these race differences. Whatever
their race, parents of pubertally mature
teenagers face a different challenge than
others.

Rowe et al.

Social Biology

Finally, this model can be extended
to investigate other dependent variables. We have already begun to investigate the use of the model with other adolescent problem behaviors (e.g.,
smoking and drinking), and the model
will eventually be useful as a description
of HIV (AIDS) virus transmission
among adolescents and as a description
of aetiologies of adolescent pregnancy.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported by a grant
from the National Institute of Child Health
and Development (R01 HD21973).

REFERENCES

ANDERSON, R.M. 1982. Transmission dynamics and control of infectious disease
agents, p. 149-176. In R. M. Anderson and
R. M. May (eds.), Population biology of infectious diseases. Springer-Verlag, New
York.

Briy, J.O.G., and J.R. Upry. 1985. Patterns of adolescent friendship and effects on
sexual behavior. Soc. Psychol. Quart.
48:27-41.

CAvALut-Srorza, L. L., and M. W. FELDMAN.
1981. Cultural transmission and evolution:
A quantitative approach. Princeton Univ.
Press, Princeton, NJ.

CrarK, S., L. ZABIN, and J. Harpy. 1984. Sex,
contraception and parenthood: Experience
and attitudes among urban black young
men. Fam. Plan. Persp. 16:77-82.

FInkEL, M., and D. FINKEL. 1975. Sexual and
contraceptive knowledge, attitudes and behaviors of male adolescents. Fam. Plan.
Persp. 7:256—260.

Foster, T. A., A. W. Voors, L.S. WEBBER,
R. R. Frericus, and G. S. Berenson. 1977.
Anthropometric and maturation measurements of children, ages 5 to 14 years, in a biracial community: The Bogalusa Heart
Study. Amer. J. Clin. Nutr. 30:582-591.

FURSTENBERG, F. F. 1976. Unplanned parenthood: The social consequences of teenage
childbearing. Free Press, New York.

 

FURSTENBERG, F. F., J. BRooKs-GuNN, and
S. P. Morcan. 1987. Adolescent mothers in
later life. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.

FURSTENBERG, F.F., S. P. Moraan, F. A.
Moore, and J. L. PETERSON. 1987. Race differences in the timing of adolescent intercourse. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 52:511-518.

Haran, W.R., E. A. Haran, and G. P.
GRILLo. 1980. Secondary sex characteristics
of girls 12 to 17 years of age: The U.S.
Health Examination Survey. J. Pediat.
96:1074-1078.

Hayss, C, D. 1987. Risking the future: Adolescent sexuality, pregnancy, and childbearing, Vol. I. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.

KANDEL, D. B. 1978. Homophily, selection,
ane socialization. Amer. J. Sociol. 84:427436.

LoEHLIN, J. C. 1987. Latent variable models:
An introduction to factor, path, and structural analysis. Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey.

Nankin, H. R., M. SPERLING, F. M. KENNy,
A. L. Drasu, and P. TRoEN. 1974. Correlation between sexual maturation and serum
gonadotropins: Comparison of black and
white youngsters. Amer. J. Med. Sci.
266:139-147.
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Vol. 36, No. 34

PRESSER, H. B. 1978. Age at menarche, sociosexual behavior, and fertility. Soc. Bio.
25:94 -101.

Ropcers, J. L.,J. D. G. Bitty andJ. R. Upry.
1982. The rescission of behaviors: Inconsistent responses in adolescent sexuality data.
Soc. Sci. Res, 11:280-296.

SMITH, E. A., J. R. Upry, and N. M. Morris.
1985. Pubertal development and friends: A
biosocial explanation of adolescent sexual
behavior. J. Hith. Soc. Behav. 26:183-192.

TANNER, J. M. 1978. Foetus into man: Physical
growth from conception to maturity. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, MA.

Upry, J. R., J.O. G. Brrry, N. M. Morris,
T. R. Grorr, and M. H. Rays. 1985. Serum
androgenic hormones motivate sexual behavior in adolescent boys. Fertil. Steril.
43:90-99.

An “Epidemic” Model 145

Upry, J. R., L. M. TALBERT, and N. M. MorRIS. 1986. Biosocial foundations for adolescent female sexuality. Demography 23:217231.

WASHINGTON, A. C, 1982. A cultural and historical perspective on pregnancy-related activity among U.S. teenagers. J. Black Psychol. 9:1-28.

ZaABIN, L. S., E. A. Smrtru, M. B. Hirscu, and
J.B. Harpy. 1986. Ages of physical maturation and first intercourse in black teenage
males and females. Demography 23:595—
605.

ZELNIK, M., and J. KANTNER. 1980. Sexual activity, contraceptive use and pregnancy
among metropolitan-area teenagers: 1971-~
1979, Fam. Plan. Persp. 12:230-—237.

ZELNIK, M., J. KANTNER, and K. Forp. 1981.
Sex and pregnancy in adolescence. Sage,
Beverley Hills, CA.
