Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Heterosis again

Napoleon Wolanski

To cite this article: Napoleon Wolanski (1971) Heterosis again, Social Biology, 18:2, 208-215,
DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1971.9987922

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1971.9987922

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB arr | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
alil Article views: 2
N
Q View related articles 4

wa Citing articles: 2 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:54

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

208 Communications

by Wolanski, Jarosz, and Pyzuk there is
much discussion about increased parental
birthplace distance resulting in increased
heterozygosity (e.g., p. 2, 11), but the investigations reported upon involve the genetically complex and poorly understood anthropometry of height, weight, head size,
and the like. Much more informative would
have been serological studies involving MN,
Ss, Cc, and other antigen systems.

Social Biology

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

In writing this response the author has profited
from discussions with A. J. Kelso, Professor of
Anthropology, University of Colorado and
Director of the University of Colorado Anthropometric and Genetic Survey, and with Kenneth
L. Beals, Assistant Professor of Anthropology,
Oregon State University. In addition, Professor
Kelso has read and favorably commented upon
the earlier draft of this response. Both Professors
Kelso and Beals agree with the general character of the comments although the final wording
is mine alone.

REFERENCES

BRESLER, JACK B. 1970. Outcrossings in caucasians
and fetal loss. Soc. Biol. 17:17-25,

PEATMAN, JOHN G. 1963. Introduction to applied
statistics. Harper and Row, New York.

Heterosis Again

Napoleon Wolanski

Department of Developmental Mor phophysiology
National Research Institute of Mother and Child
Warsaw, Poland

Mr. Tinsman’s remarks are perhaps not
so much addressed to the problem of heterosis itself as to several problems of methodology of scientific research. In these remarks the well-known method was used to
suggest something that was not said in the
paper, nor, in the author’s opinion, does it
by any means result from his paper. Let us,
however, analyze the remarks of Mr. Tinsman on our paper (Social Biology 17:17—
25).

1. If either Table 7 or 9 would settle
matters unequivocally, we should not have
considered it necessary to publish both
these tables, but only one of them. In Table
7, the authors had in mind to investigate to
what an extent the somatic characters under

WotaANsKI, NAPOLEON, EarrA Jarosz, and M1ra
Pyzux. 1970. Heterosis in man: Growth in
offspring and distance between parents’ birthplaces. Soc. Biol. 17:1-16.

study systematically grow or decrease concomitantly with the increase in distance be
_ tween the birthplace of the father and that

of the mother. For this purpose the material
was divided into cohorts each with a characteristic range of distances (e.g., a class
up to 10 km. is a village or a district of a
town where there are great chances for the
people to meet, as we have written in the
paper; see page 3). Five cohorts were thus
formed, and four differences were calculated.
It was known beforehand that even if all
four differences had the same sign (direction
of change), this would not have amounted to
a statistical proof. This results from the
fact that even as abundant material as ours
cannot be broken up into many classes,
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

Vol. 18, No. 2

each of which, in turn, would include too
few persons, so that nothing could be proved
here statistically, Apart from that, the
analysis was made more arduous by the
fact that the distances between parents’
birthplaces do not constitute a normal,
Gaussian distribution. In this situation,
correlation coefficients for the checking of
the problem were calculated on the strength
of four-field tables, i.e., dividing the distances and the various features into large
and small ones.

2. Scientific research, done correctly from
the point of view of methodology, is not
undertaken with the attitude that something will result from it, Usually, when scientific research is carried out, in particular
when a grant of an important institution
has been received, a program of investigation is submitted hypothesizing the result
expected or raising the question one Is
trying to test. Therefore, Mr. Tinsman’s
remark that the title contains the formulation “‘Heterosis in Man” is unfounded. Our
study merely aimed at investigating whether
heterosis exists in human populations. The
remarks submitted in our article are not
theoretical speculations, but the report
(multilateral as far as possible, if not comprehensive) of research results and an attempt at their interpretation.

3. Statistical methods (significance tests)
cannot prove a hypothesis. The checking of
working (null) hypotheses by means of
mathematical statistics is merely an attempt
to evaluate the credibility of alternative
hypotheses. It is assumed here that the
given event may be not realized, in the way
postulated in the study, once, 5, or 10 times
per 100 times, depending on the level of
significance. It is only the determination of
the degree of confidence in the credibility of
a given result, not that of a scientific truth.
Scientific truths are proven by way of logical reasoning and the analysis of their concordance with known scientific facts, If the
probability of an event is even very great,

Communications

209

but logical analysis does not establish the
character of direct relationship, no reasonable person will adopt it as a system of
cause and effect. In other words, (1) the
logical analysis of a problem does not release one from checking the frequency of
deviation from an established fact (we find
the fact, but the question arises if it always occurs) and (2) statistical analysis
does not absolve one from logical reasoning,
and the knowledge of the subject investigated must be greater still than that of statistical methods. My mentor and friend,
Dr, Stanley M. Garn, probably rightly said
that (I used this formulation as the motto
of one of my books) less than 10% of
scientific workers know when a given statistical method ought to be used, but 1 per
thousand at the utmost know when it must
not be used. When a hypothesis ts not subject to logical refutation and it is shown that
the given fact will take place in, eg., 95
cases per 100, we are inclined to consider
this hypothesis to be a theory. For a theory
to be rejected, however, it is enough to show
any logical error in the reasoning or to show
that in fact such events are rare.

4, In our case, a doubt might indeed persist how to interpret the fact that in some
age or sex classes there are statistically
significant positive correlations, while for
other ones these latter are negative. The
absence of correlation, however, is here no
obstacle for reasoning. We have here two
kinds of facts in mind:

a) Concerning Mr. Tinsman’s remark
concerning our Tables 7 and 9, the contradiction of results suggested does not exist.
Let us consider the facts he points out. The
stature-distance correlation for 8-year-old
boys amounts to 0.7810 (Table 9), but the
result in Table 7 shows 3 cases of concordant
increase of stature (of which one is in tenths
of mm, which was not indicated in the
table) concomitantly with the increase of
the distance between the parents’ birthplaces, and only in one case is there no such
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

210 Communications

concordance. Other quoted cases are similar.
Even in the case of the Quetelet index in 16year-old girls, the correlation coefficient
(0.0106) is statistically insignificant, and the
system of the direction of changes (in Table
7) is twice in the direction of an increase of
the magnitude, and twice in the direction of
decrease. In the case of the stature-distance
relation in 8-year-old girls in Table 9, a
statistically significant correlation coefficient of 0.6917 appears, but in Table 7 the
distance increases twice and diminishes
twice, which means that no contradictions
appear, only incomplete concordance. This
is entirely comprehensible, and that is why
we adopted calculated correlation coefficients as the criterion of the statistical assessment (as mentioned above in point 1).
For methodological purposes we showed
also the parallel application of the method of
comparison of arithmetic means and correlation coefficients, in order to point out
the diversity of results; however, no contradictory results occurred. It could be
foreseen that such an eventuality may happen. Our article is an instance of the same,
and it is difficult to fight facts. This should
be no surprise for persons with mathematical training.

b) The other remark concerns the comprehensive grasping of the phenomenon (for
24 combinations). In our opinion reasoning
of this kind is erroneous. As it seems to result from our paper, heterosis is an effect
that is manifest in a relevant pace of development (acceleration). So its nature is a
developmental one. Hence, every age class
has to be separately treated. It seems comprehensible to us that the heterosis effect
grows in the eighth year of age for a number
of traits (somewhat also for those that in
fact do not exhibit heterosis, as the head
circumference or cephalic index), and it is
comprehensible that with age (e.g., at the
age of 16 years for some traits) this effect
diminishes. Our hypothesis asserts that
heterozygotic subjects exhibit more sensi
Social Biology

tivity to the stimulating effect of external
environment factors. Naturally, under the
influence of unknown factors (e.g., hormonal ones), this may appear more intensely in some age classes only.

c) In our view, the effect of heterosis may
be mentioned, however, when it is noted in a
concordant manner, that is when it occurs
in all age classes as a significant positive
event and, possibly, without correlation. In
case a statistically significant and positive
correlation coefficient appears in some age
or sex Classes, and in other classes of age or
sex a Statistically significant and negative
coefficient appears for the same trait, this
does not entitle us to maintain that the
heterosis effect exists. Parallel to the data of
Morton (1958), Schull (1962), and Schork
(1964) we formulate the conclusion that this
effect does not appear in the period of fetal
development. Undoubtedly, this effect, as
we mentioned it in our paper, requires further investigations. That is why we published as complete data as possible (both
Table 7 and 9), so that the possibility may
exist to repeat research in other regions and
for other populations similar to our research.
We are interested in the result of investigations in other regions, to see whether somewhat different results may be obtained for
other populations.

5. The fact that the most numerous
significant correlation coefficients appear In
children at the age of 8 years may also result from the fact that the parents of these
children experienced the time of the war
during their adolescent age. Maybe a factor
is involved here that indirectly exerts an
influence on the biological value of the gametes of these parents. This would be a factor whose existence is conjectured (Wolanski, 1966; Wolanski and Charzewska 1967).
Some differences (but rather in the evaluation of level of significance) may result also
from the fact that we examined more 8-yearoldthan4-and 16-year-old children (Table1).

6. The qualification is unimportant that

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

Vol. 18, No. 2

children of the same parents occur repeatedly. Firstly, 1,896 children of 1,606
families (not 1,500) were examined, but this
does not change the essence of the problem.
Secondly, the correlations were counted
separately for the various age and sex
classes, eliminating twins from the material.
Consequently a different effect is involved
here than, for example, the calculation of
similarity coefficients between parents and
their children at various ages, that Mr.
Tinsman perhaps had in mind. He is wrong
in suspecting us of such an error which any
student of biology or mathematics knows by
rote (another formula for the calculation of
the correlation-similarity coefficient is used
in that case).

7. The other data in which Mr. Tinsman
is interested are presented in a paper now
in the press in Poland (Wolariski, 1970). The
data were not supplied in the present publication, as they exhibit an entirely chaotic
arrangement and contribute nothing new in
this matter, as we stated in the paper. These
tables, however, extend on several typescript pages and include many data (education, earnings, profession of the parents,
etc.). Health service is free of charge in
Poland; therefore, differences are small and
random. No statistically significant differences were found in the physical development of children of Szczecin whose parents
belong to different social classes; this is
typical for other Polish cities (Wolanski,
1970).

8. Mr. Tinsman’s remark on the political
aspect of my statements is incomprehensible
for me. Any great social and demographic
processes have their political significance.
From the biological point of view, however,
it is very interesting and important to find
out at what rate the integration of a popula
1 Unfortunately, the authors did not receive the
proofs of their paper due to mail delays. The paper
should also have read that 950 girls were examined,
not 850, and in Table 3 the difference between the
parent’s age for girls age 4 should average 2.92
years, not 2.78.

Communications

211

tion. of over 300,000 inhabitants occurs.
This results from the fact that the achievement of panmixia leads to specific conclusions in the field of population genetics. It
can of course be debatable whether the yardstick we adopted is correct. Mr. Tinsman,
however, formulates his words imprecisely.
It was not the fact of contracting marriage
at Szczecin which was a yardstick for us, but
the fact of giving birth to children there and of
contracting marriage and taking up residence
in Szczecin. Only this yields the basis for
ascertaining the biological integration of this
population. Of course, there will never be
100% of marriages contracted in Szczecin,
if only because of migration. We determined,
however, the level of immigration (which is
here more important than emigration) and
at present it amounts to 2.6%, from the
final value. As a result of the above we
expect full integration around the year 1977
(Wolanski, 1970). We should be glad to hear
another proposal for measuring the biological integration of the population.

9, As a matter of fact, we have already
in press other yardsticks of the changes
occurring in the population investigated.
We quote one instance in Figure 1. We see
that the typical maturation (i.e., the appearance of menarche) of women in the
summer time (which is typical for the
countryside) has now turned to maturation
in the winter time (which is typical for
cities) (Kowalska, Valgsik, and Wolajski,
1963).

10. The effect of heterosis has to be
studied (or such was at least the assumption
of our paper) on quantitative traits. Heterosis in maize, for instance, is measured in
quantitative features such as yield. In the
case of the working hypothesis which we
adopted and of well-known publications on
the nonexistence of heterosis in infants, and
of its existence in adults (Hulse, 1957;
Nold, 1963; Schreider, 1967) we have to assume that heterosis is a property appearing
in the course of development. Therefore,

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

, Rural u Urban
peak peak
xX?
OO
Girls from
Szczecin,
menarche:

   
    

0.0,
1964-5 SOS

1961-2 }
XX)

 
 

 
   

Women from
Szezecin,
menarche 960
Y
OX
1947 XX
CL g SS
Mo i con XX
= A
metnerot UN
7997-8 (IN

 

Spring Summer Fall Winter

Frc, 1.—-Season of the appearance of menarche in present-day female inhabitants of Szczecin before
their arrival in Szczecin; in other females who matured after having settled in Szczecin (after 1945-1947);
and in their daughters already born in Szczecin (according to Wolafiski, 1970).

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 18, No. 2

features have to be investigated which are
modified with age. Mr. Tinsman suggests
that the research should be made based on
serological features. These latter features
do not change with age, so we cannot investigate them under the aspect of interest
for us. In fact, Kolgtaj (1967) investigated
the properties of DNA and RNA in the
erythrocytes of the blood in chickens and
found there a heterosis effect, but this
refers to quantitative, not qualitative features of the blood. We do not think that
body height and other somatic features are a
less apt case for investigations. Mr. Tinsman
may find a discussion of the differences between quantitative and qualitative features
in the interesting book Human Development (1966) in Hunt’s chapter. Were Mr.
Tinsman, however, interested in research
on other relationships of blood groups, he
would first have to prove that there is a
relationship (a real genetic linkage) between blood groups and, for example, body
height.

11. Mr. Tinsman formulates the question
whether or not it is correct to use Quetelet’s
coefficient instead of body weight. This
problem is well known. Body weight is
highly correlated with stature (body height),
while after normalization on stature (i.e.,
the application of Quetelet’s index) this
index shows no correlation with stature
(Billewicz, Kemsley, and Thomson, 1962).
It is, therefore, a feature of the organism

differing from stature and body weight, and

that is why we became interested in it. The
reasons for investigating the cephalic index
are similar. We knew the head circumference, and probably head length and head
width would have shown similar results, but
we expected other results from head shape
expressed in the cephalic index.

And now a few minor explanations, according to Mr. Tinsman’s wish:

1. The measurements of chest circumference were made with an accuracy of 1
mm, but it is usual to supply significant fig
Communications

213

ures for direct measurements, and therefore statistics on head and chest circumference were supplied in tenths of millimeters, and stature in mm.

2. In Tables 10 and 11 the stature of
children was standardized, i.e., expressed in
percentages of the mean body height of the
father and mother, as should have been clear
from the text (first paragraph on page 11 of
our paper).

Concerning the numbered remarks in Mr.
Tinsman’s comments:

1, The standard errors of arithmetic
means (E;) have been published in Tables 3
and 5; it is easy to realize therefrom the
significance of the results presented.

2. None of the parents of the children
examined were born during World War II,
and the difference results from the fact of
the rounding off of the figures. In some regions of Poland the war lasted 3 years, and
in other ones nearly 6 years. This resulted
in some differences in the limits of fluctuations for the fathers of 8-year-old children
and in mothers of 4-year-old children. We
presented the problems and debated this
point in other papers of ours (Wolanski,
Jarosz, and Pyzuk, 1968; Wolafski, 1969,
1970).

3. In our opinion there are not too many
studies on the effect of heterosis in man and
sometimes they are contradictory (see, for
example the interesting investigations made
by Ferak, Lichardova, and Bojnova [1968]).

4, The explanation was present in our
paper under discussion.

5, 6, and 8. I supplied the explanations
above.

7. Mr. Tinsman’s reasoning ts not correct.
This results from the fact that at the present
moment children are already being born to
the children who had been born, already
after the war, in Szczecin. Hence, the tendency grows towards a decrease in the
mating radius (the average distance of the
parents’ birthplaces). When the investigations were made, the mating radius amountDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

214 Communications

ed to some 270 km. Therefore the application of the sum of percentages by Mr.
Tinsman leads to wrong conclusions.

9. By the term “pure race” (p. 13)
Koigtaj means animals from inbred lines
mating. We merely meant Negro or white
girls, in contradistinction to their hybrids,
i.e. mulattos.

10. This problem is now the object of
our studies. As is known, there are two
concepts of heterosis conducting to apparently different effects: (a@) high hybrid
vigor, (b) balanced polymorphism. In fact,
however, these two effects seem to be interrelated. As I have pointed it out already
earlier (Wolafski, 1970), sexual differences
in body size in newborn infants depend to a
certain extent on the selection of weaker
and/or smaller male fetuses. Live male
newborn infants are some 2.3% heavier
than female ones, but stillborn male fetuses
are nearly 3% lighter than female ones. To
some extent this is an equivalent, on a
populational scale, for the fact that many
more numerous live fetuses are born than
stillborn ones. The body length of live-born
boys is in Warsaw some 1.4% higher than
that of girls and this, perhaps, is in relation
with the above-mentioned mechanism of
selection. This difference, however, amounts
in adults to some 6.6%. Thus, it exceeds the
effect of selection in the fetal period by
more than 5%.

In this connection it may be assumed
that it is possible to explain the increasing
difference in body height by means of the
heterosis effect. That means that subjects
with sexual heterochromosomes (XY, i.e.,
males) can be treated as heterogeneous, as
compared with homogeneous (XX) females,
in particular since the genes responsible for
body height seem to be situated in the sexual
chromosomes. In this situation, that surplus
of 5% of body height in males as compared
with females, achieved in post-natal development, may be simply a symptom of

Social Biology

heterosis (luxurience) appearing in postnatal development.

As a matter of fact, an opinion appears
that as early as the last three months of
pregnancy male fetuses develop more rapidly (Ounsted, 1969) than female ones. This
opinion seems to be wrong, when the nearly
twice as high mortality of the small male
fetuses in the last three months of pregnancy, as compared with female fetuses, is
taken into consideration (Wolanski, 1970).
In fact, weaker heterozygotic (XY) male
fetuses of smaller body size die. This creates
an apparent impression that surviving
subjects developed more rapidly. In fact,
it is possible that male subjects die frequently because they are heterogeneous;
this corresponds with Bresler’s (1970)
general thesis that there are more frequent
fetal losses with the increasing of parental
outcrossings.

11. In genetics, capital letters (A, B, etc.)
are used for dominant characters, and small
letters (a, b, and so on) for recessive
characters. Hence, a heterozygote Aa gives
as a result a phenotypic effect A also for
quantitative characters. But, if two different
alleles A; and A, would pair, this would
give an intermediate effect in quantitative
characters. It is also worthwhile to be
acquainted with papers on the effect of
overdominance and the “intermeshing” of
dominance in attempts at explaining the
substrate of the heterosis effect. These are
matters covered in the textbooks.

It seems to me that in Mr. Tinsman’s
statements, regrets are expressed that were
caused by the loss of a considerable portion
of the originality of the studies made at
Boulder for 16 months. It ought, however,
to be taken into account that, in the presentday world, competition exists not only in
sports, but also in scientific discoveries. As a
matter of fact we began our investigations
in 1963, and in 1964 we obtained a grant
from the United States Public Health Ser
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

Vol. 18, No. 2

vice. We carried out the aforesaid series of
investigations as far back as 1966 and in
that same year we reported them at the 7th
International Congress of Nutrition in
Hamburg. No wonder then, that we obtained our results earlier. We shall, how
Communications

 

215

ever, read with great interest the reports
from the investigations made in Boulder. I
had the opportunity to visit this interesting
scientific center in 1965. I shall be glad if the
remarks made here will help my colleagues
in Boulder in their research problems.

REFERENCES

Bittewicz, W. Z., W. F. F. Kemstey, and A. M.
THoMSON, 1962. Brit. J. Prev. Soc. Med. 16: 183.

BRESLER, J. B. 1970. OQutcrossings in Caucasians
and fetal loss. Soc. Biol. 17:17-25.

Ferak, V., Z. Lrcuarpova, and V. Boynova, 1968.
Endogamy, exogamy, and stature. Eugen. Quart.
15:273-276.

Hutse, F. S. 1957. Exogamie et hétérosis. Archives
Suisses d’Anthropologie Generale 22:103-125.
Hont, E. E., Jr. 1966. The developmental genetics
in man p, 76-122. In F. Falkner (ed.), Human

development. Saunders, Philadelphia.

Kozatay, A. 1967. Physiological investigations on
heterosis in chickens. ITI. DNA and RNA acids
in erythrocytes of the blood. Folia Biologica
15:117-126,

Kowatska, I., J. A. VaLsix, and N. WoLaNsxt1.
1963. Season of the year in which menstruation
begins in relation to age and social and geographical environment. Prace i Materialy Naukowe IMD (Research Reports) 1:81-108.

Morton, N. E. 1958. Empirical risk in consanguineous marriages: Birth weight, gestation time,
and measurements of infants. Amer. J. Hum.
Genet. 10:344-349.

No.p, F. 1963. Korpergrésse und Akzeleration. In
Webrdienst und Gesungheit, 7. Wehr und Wiesen
Verlagsg., Darmstadt.

OvunstTEp, M. 1969. Familial factors affecting fetal
growth. Jn Perinatal factors affecting human de
velopment. PAHO—WHbO, Sc. Publ. 185:60/67.
Washington.

ScHorK, M. A. 1964. The effects of inbreeding on
growth. Amer. J, Hum. Genet. 16:292-300.

ScHULL, W. J. 1962. Inbreeding and maternal effects
in Japanese. Eugen. Quart. 9:14-22.

WOLANSKI, N. 1966. Environmental modification of
human form and function. 7 J. Brozek {ed.), The
biology of human variation. Annals New York
Academy Sciences 134:826-840.

. 1969. Srodowiskowe czynniki biologiczno
socjaine rodziny i ich wptyw na rozw6j fizyczny

dziecka. Problemy Rodziny 4:9-19.

. 1970. The biological development in man,

Pafistwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, p. 438,

Warszawa (in Polish).

. 1970. Stan biologiczny i procesy integracyjne

populacji miasta Szczecina w 25-leciu PRL.

Przeglad Zachodnio Pomorski (in press).

. 1970, Genetic and ecological factors in
human growth. Hum. Biol. (in press).

Wo tanskx1, N., and J. CHARZEWSKA, 1967. Similarity
of some anthropological characteristics of parents
and their offspring in different phases of ontogenetic development. Acta genet. (Basel) 17:
365-381.

Woranskt, N., E., Jarosz and M. Pyzux 1968.
Heterosis effect as a causative factor in the secular trend of some continuous traits in man, Anthropologie 6: 15-17.

 

 

 

 

 
