Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Discussion: Man's evolutionary future, session VI

Dudley Kirk

To cite this article: Dudley Kirk (1972) Discussion: Man's evolutionary future, session VI, Social
Biology, 19:4, 362-366, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9988009

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9988009

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:33
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Discussion: Man’s Evolutionary Future, Session VI

Dudley Kirk

Food Research Institute
Stanford University
Stanford, California

Garrett Hardin has addressed us in his
usual artful and attractive style. Much as
I disagree with him, I must admit to enjoying his skillful presentation.

But we do differ on many points. I will
put them under two headings: first, the
causes and nature of population trends in
the United States (I believe we were talking primarily about the United States)
and, second, the genetic implications of
these changes.

First, the causes and nature of population trends in the United States: I feel that
Garrett Hardin greatly underestimates
man’s ability to make rational adjustment
to his environment and to adjust his family
size accordingly. He makes this adjustment
in part because of his own specific situation
but also in line with the norms of the
society at large. These he has absorbed in
the process of socialization, often without
realizing he has acquired them. Actually,
most of the things we do we do because
we think they are in some way right and
proper, that is, in accord with the values
of our society. People in their childbearing
behavior, as in most other aspects of their
behavior, tend to conform to the norms
that exist both in the specific group to
which they belong and also in the society at
large. In other words, individuals react to

 

their particular situation and they also
react to the norms which are established by
the collective responses of the society to
its situation.

This relates to population trends in this
way. Some of us may have the impression
that in recent years we have been experiencing 2a astounding reduction in the birth
rate and in fertility. What is not usually
recognized is that we have been experiencing a continuous and rather rapid reduction
in the birth rate since 1957. It started
before the pill; it was well advanced before
the more frenetic shouting by alarmists
about population trends in the United
States. Our society had already started to
make its adjustment fourteen years ago.
Individuals were participating in this not
because they were concerned about national
population problems—of course not—but
because their particular life situation was
such that they began to marry later, have
children later, not so close together, and
probably not so many. Both as individual
couples and as a society we were pretty far
along toward an adjustment toward zero
population growth before the recent hullabaloo about the problem.

The very success of the zero population
growth idea is related to the fact that the
people concerned were already “converted.”

362

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 19, No. 4

The ZPG movement is upper-middle class,
suburban, intellectual, and lily-white, not
accidentally the group that experienced the
greatest proportionate “baby boom” after
World War II. Even more important, it is
the group that has seen its former nearmonopoly of the suburbs, the universities,
the better beaches, the national parks, and
prime recreation areas invaded by the more
and more affluent middle and lower-middleclass masses. ZPG and the population
alarmists are those whose near-monopoly of
the better physical environment has been
destroyed by growing affluence of the
masses. This they see as a “population explosion.”’

It is only the inertia of past trends, reflected in our bulge of young adults, that
will keep the total population growing for
some years to come. The white population,
and recently the total population, has
reached a reproduction rate of one—that
is, parents are having only enough children
to reproduce themselves every generation.
The only reason we continue to have population growth is that we have a disproportionate number of young people at the ages
when people marry and have children. If
present trends continue, we will shortly go
below generation replacement, and we will
in fact have zero population growth before
a very long time. We will perhaps experience population decline in the not-toodistant future. This will pose quite a different set of problems not understood by
alarmists about population growth.

Of course we aren’t going to have zero
population growth next year or in five or
even ten years. In fact, I think it would
be very unfortunate if we did. I could
expand on that, but will simply say that
distortions of the age structure might well
be more deleterious than a somewhat larger
population. We already are closing schools
because we don’t have enough primary
school children and already have the op
Discussion:

Session VI 363
posite problems to those of baby-boom
days for the youngest age groups. Such
wide swings have many bad effects; but
that is another subject.

Thus, I disagree with assertions that
the state should in various ways pressure
couples not to have children, and in particular not to have more than two children.

I am old enough to remember the 1930's,
when there was much concern about our
declining birth rate and the possible bad
effects of a declining population. I have
teased Charles Westoff, who is in charge
of the staff preparing the report for the
President’s Commission on Population,
that if they don’t hurry up and get this
report out they are going to have to
change the whole focus. They may have to
advise the President on methods of raising
the birth rate. Obviously this is far-fetched
now, but in fifteen or twenty years I view
it as a real possibility.

Thus, the United States population was
already making the adjustment before the
shouters came on the scene, and the trend
has not changed. Therefore, I am not concerned, as Dr. Hardin is, about a population control policy. There seems to me
nothing on the scene to justify coercion or
punitive measures to restrict childbearing.

I disagree with Dr. Hardin about present
population trends and their implications. I
also disagree with him on the genetic implications of what is being experienced
today. He said in his paper, you will recall,
that there is a misapprehension that over
the long periods of declining fertility in the
United States and other industrial countries
the opportunities for natural selection decreased by a considerable amount. He is
quite right, of course, in saying that, on
the contrary, the index of opportunity for
natural selection actually rose with the long
downward trend in family size. This is because the index is determined by variance
around the mean. It has no relation to the
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

364

average itself. The variance around a twochild average can be just as important and
even more important than the variance
around an average of eight children, which
women had in the colonial period.

But Dr. Hardin has perhaps not observed
the more recent trends. These have not
been in this direction. Actually, since the
Second World War, the index for natural
selection did in fact go down. This is documented in an article which appeared in the
Proceedings of the Academy of Sciences
(Kirk, 1968). In fact, this is just what
ZPG advocates—that variance about a
two-child average should be reduced, at
least as regards more than two.

In any case, people voluntarily are
moving to lower parities. This is just as
true of minorities and disadvantaged as it
is of the affluent white majority, and surveys indicate that the former don’t in fact
want larger families than the majority.
Furthermore, we have been moving very
rapidly in the direction of more and more
voluntary control. More liberal laws on
abortion should accelerate trends in that
direction. If we may assume that the vast
majority of children that will be born in
the future will be wanted, I think we need
to look at the genetic implications of voluntary childbearing as well. So there are two
aspects: the efficiency with which birth
control is practiced and the number of children couples really want to have.

Dr. Hardin is telling us that if you allow
for differences in the efficiency with which
people practice birth control you will promote something that as a biologist he calls
“homo progenitivus,’’ who is going to outbreed “homo contracipiens’’ because by
definition the people who practice contraception more effectively are weeding themselves out of the population. Does Dr.
Hardin really believe this is something
new? Reproductive differentials from differential effectiveness in use of birth control

Kirk

Social Biology

have existed in Western society for at least
three hundred years. The striking fact is
the extent to which these differentials have
been reduced by the greater availability of
effective methods of birth control. To take
a specific example, men in Who’s Who born
a century ago and since have consistently
had an average of two children. Native
white women averaged 3.5 in 1875-79, but
this has now fallen to about the level of
men in Who’s Who (Kirk, 1956). Modern
Western society has been “weeding out”
the planners, the cautious, the “conscientious” and the less impulsive through their
more effective birth control for at least
three centuries. But it is not at all clear
that this has had much effect on the gene
pool. Certainly social changes have been
much more important than genetic change
in shaping the personality and behavior of
modern man. In any event, this factor is
becoming Jess important as childbearing
becomes more and more a voluntary matter
subject to rational choice by birth control
methods applied independent of the sexual
act.

There is, of course, the assertion that
people really want too many children for
the social good. The fallacy of survey results on this subject has been clearly demonstrated (Ryder and Westoff, 1965).
Respondents’ “ideal” family size tends on
the one hand to be retrospective (they are
reluctant to give an “ideal” less than the
actual) and, on the other, to be too high
because practical considerations often lead
couples to have fewer children than their
“ideal.” In any event, the reported “‘ideal,”
like actual fertility, is now rapidly sinking
to the level of generation replacement.

As a larger and larger percentage of
births are wanted, the question becomes:
Who wants children? Isn’t is reasonable to
suppose that those who do are probably
better parents than those who for whatever
reason decide not to have children? I would
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

argue that many women—many couples—
should not have any children. They are not
equipped to provide good socialization for
children. By contrast, I believe we can all
think of examples of families with numerous children that have done a magnificent
job of raising their children. To the extent
that genetic factors are relevant, voluntary
childbearing would be favoring by selection
the kind of parents who would do the best
by their children—give them the most love,
have the most empathy, give them the best
upbringing. Perhaps this is as much a speculation as what Dr. Hardin is saying, but
isn’t this a genetic result just as likely as
selection of those who are more fecund or
more careless in the use of birth control?
Purely voluntary childbearing should have
a very salutary result from a social point of
view and perhaps even from a genetic point
of view.

Now, let me return to one other point in
Dr. Hardin’s paper. He implies that coercive measures will be necessary, among
other things, to limit parents to two children. I think this would be very distressing
from a genetic point of view and certainly
from a social point of view. Why should we
strive for diversity in our ecology by demanding uniformity in our own behavior?
Why should we not promote rather than
inhibit a variety of situations in which
children grow up? As I said earlier, there
are important differences in the ability of
parents to give the best upbringing to children. Because of this, isn’t it much more
desirable to have a diversity in size of families? Eighty-eight per cent of all females
born who reached age 35 in 1966 had had
children. I personally think this is too
many mothers; I am sure that a lot of those
shouldn’t have had children. Given completely voluntary childbearing, I’m sure
that many of them wouldn’t have.

Thus, it seems to me that voluntary
choice may very well have positive genetic

Discussion: Session YI

365

influences; but I would add that the genetic impact of these things in any event
is quite dubious when social changes are
occurring so rapidly. We swing back and
forth; differential fertility swings back and
forth, and I think it is a nice question
whether we can draw any major conclusions about the genetic implications of such
short-range changes as have occurred in a
single generation.

Turning to Mr. Lowi’s paper, I welcome
this paper because I have felt for a long
time that people were proposing population
contro] measures without the slightest idea
of what these mean in the actual political
arena and what the side-effects may be for
some of these policies. I very much welcome the new interest of political scientists
such as Messrs. Lowi, Myron Weiner, and
others who have begun to think about possible population policies and their potential
side effects.

I warmly agree with the desirability of
what is referred to as the constituent policy—centrally, education. This is the best
approach. But I am not sure that I would
agree with the kind of education that Lowi
would propose. I don’t think we need to
tell our children that it is so awful to have
several children because of social effects,
since I do not think in all cases it is antisocial for a couple to have a lot of children. On the contrary, I think different
family sizes may contribute a great deal.

With respect to the general tenor of the
paper, I was disappointed in the restrictive
treatment of distributive policies and redistributive policies. The author feels that
we have to have a policy that has as its
primary purpose population control. I personally disagree with this. I don’t think the
population aspects of revised taxes should
be a dominant concern, partly because I
don’t think these would be effective and
partly because other aspects of social policy
seem to me more important in tax reform.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

366 Kirk

I don’t think there is any evidence that
elimination of income tax deductions for
children, for instance, would make anything but a miniscule difference. For one
thing it wouldn’t affect the people who are
having the most children today for the
simple reason they don’t pay income tax
anyway. This isn’t a very practical way to
go about it.

Other measures, which I personally feel
are very desirable for other reasons, would
also be the most effective for slowing population growth, if that is the objective. For
example, minimum family income. As you
know, we are almost unique among advanced countries in not having family allowances (supplements to salaries and
wages based on number of children). The
typical alarmist is very frightened when
anybody talks about introducing this. The
simplistic idea is that such a measure is
going to increase the number of children
among the poor and disadvantaged. They
went through this in Canada some years
ago when legislation to introduce family
allowances came up for debate. The English-speaking Canadians were afraid that
the French-speaking Canadians, who al
Social Biology

ready had higher birth rates, would, because of the family allowances, have even
more children. Of course, the reasoning
that I am speaking about didn’t always get
out in public debate—the newspapers
didn’t talk very much about these things
openly—but there was in fact strong opposition among the English-speaking provinces and in the French-speaking, less
opposition. Since the adoption of the family
allowances, the birth rate of the Frenchspeaking population has gone down much
faster than the birth rate in the Englishspeaking groups. In other words, we may
be looking at the thing from an entirely
wrong perspective. We are looking at it in
“rational” economic terms; give people
more money and they will have more children. This isn’t the way it works at all.
You give the poor family a minimum income, and they see a way of getting out of
the circle of poverty in which they live.
They begin to think in terms of having
fewer children because they really can give
them a chance for education and a better
start. Measures that promote the well-being
of the total population are also likely to be
those that promote responsible parenthood.

REFERENCES

Kirk, Duprey. 1956. The fertility of a gifted
group: A study of the number of children of
men in Who’s Who, p. 79-98. In The nature
and transmission of the genetic and cultural
characteristics of human populations. Milbank
Memorial Fund, New York.

. 1968. Patterns of survival and reproduc
 

tion in the United States: Implications for
selection. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 59:662-670.

RypEr, Norman B., and CHartres F, WEsTorr.
1969. Relationships among intended, expected,
desired, and ideal family size: United States,
1965. Center for Population Research, NIH,
Washington, D.C.
