Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Abortion and sterilization: An insight into
obstetrician-gynecologists’ attitudes and practices

Arthur T. Fort

To cite this article: Arthur T. Fort (1971) Abortion and sterilization: An insight into
obstetrician#gynecologists’ attitudes and practices, Social Biology, 18:2, 192-194, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1971.9987916

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1971.9987916

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:54

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

 

Abortion and Sterilization: An Insight into
Obstetrician-Gynecologists’ Attitudes
and Practices

Arthur T. Fort

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Louisiana State University Medical Center
School of Medicine at Shreveport
Shreveport, Louisiana

Persons interested in eugenics, whether
they be social workers, educators, or childdevelopment workers, often see the need
for abortion or sterilization procedures to
prevent repetition of certain family tragedies. Probably more than most disciplines,
they are aware of social problems engendered by reproductive patterns which might
be altered by making abortion and sterilization procedures available. Therefore,
they ought to acquire insight into the prevailing working philosophy among OQbGyn’s regarding sterilization and abortion.
This paper will attempt to provide that
insight derived from conversations with
other practicing Ob-Gyn’s and from articles
in the professional literature. It will be
modified to include the slightly more liberal
viewpoint of oncoming students and residents. Since Ob-Gyn’s are no more homogeneous than any other group, a wide
range of viewpoints must be acknowledged;
however, I will not include them. Neither
will I attempt to develop a statistical composite of these viewpoints since the purpose
here is to depict the prevailing working
philosophy.

Abortion and sterilization have as their
purpose the prevention of birth of an unwanted child by employing methods more
extreme than day-to-day birth control. The
former is an act of interception, while the
latter is an act of contraception. The former
is directed at an existing conceptus, the

latter at a potential conceptus. Consequently, as is well known, these procedures
are considered fundamentally different in
the minds of many. As a result, the acceptability and availability of the two differ
greatly. The common denominator of the
two is the desire to prevent the existence of
a child. When is that desire regarded as
acceptable enough for an Ob-Gyn to act in
a patient’s behalf? The reasons a child may
be unwanted can be separated into two
primary partitions, Acceptable or Unacceptable. These two partitions and their
general subdivision are shown in Table 1.
I will forego further subdivisions or a defense of the assignment of reasons to either
acceptable or unacceptable partitions as
they would be superfluous to the main
theme of this paper.

Table 2 takes into account the previously
mentioned dichotomy between abortion and
sterilization and rearranges the acceptable
reasons into those warranting sterilization
in the nongravid state and those warranting
abortion coupled with sterilization. This
arrangement also gives consideration to the
reversibility of a condition wherein pregnancy might be life-threatening during an
acute phase of maternal illness but harmless
after recovery. Also, as the reasons become
more voluntary, the number of existing
children in a family enters into the analysis.
An example would be sterilization for population control. In such a case, if a couple

192
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

Vol. 18, No. 2

have two children, are stably married, and
are old enough to know their own minds,
they might be offered sterilization but not
abortion. Furthermore, such sterilization
would be contingent upon the fact that their

TABLE 1

REASONS A CHILD IS UNWANTED SEEN AS
ACCEPTABLE OR UNACCEPTABLE TO
OBSTETRICIAN-GYNECOLOGISTS

Acceptable
Parental] resources have been exceeded
Emotionally (reversible) (irreversible)
Physically (reversible)
Financially (reversible)
Parental resources intrinsically very limited
Unmarried (reversible)
Mentally ill (reversible)
Mentally retarded (irreversible)
Congenital abnormality or disease
Population limitation

Unacceptable
Chronic lack of foresight in use of contraceptives
Contraceptive failure in a couple with adequat
parental resources

Brief Reports 193

youngest child had survived at least one
year and demonstrated normalcy.

If the foregoing has shown where ObGyn’s sympathy lies, just what is the actual
availability of these procedures? The answer
is that Ob-Gyn’s are more conservative in
practice than in their talk. Few Ob-Gyn’s
care to gain distinction as the local abortionist, so that they are not apt to perform
abortion except in the more extreme conditions of maternal risk or fetal abnormality.
Many more will discreetly direct the
patients to physician abortionists in their
locality. The rapidly proliferating abortion
services in New York and California offer
an easy out for those who can afford them
but remain outside the reach of most social
service clientele. This pattern of response
will not change in the near future.

TABLE 2

REASONS A CHILD IS UNWAN:‘TED ACCEPTABLE TO OBSTETRICIAN- GYNECOLOGISTS
BY THOSE WARRANTING STERILIZATION, ABORTION, OR
ABORTION PLUS STERILIZATION

STERILIZATION WARRANTED
IN NONGRAVID STATE

Less than
REASONS 2 Children
Parental resources exceeded
Emotionally
Acute No
Chronic Yes
Physically
Acute No
Chronic Yes
Financially
Acute No
Chronic No
Parental resources intrinsically
limited
Unmarried No
Mentally ill
Acute No
Chronic Yes
Mentally retarded Yes

Congenital abnormality ordisease § Yes

Population limitation No

ABORTION
CouPpLep
WITH
More than ABORTION STERILIZATION
2 Children WARRANTED WARRANTED
Yes Yes No
Yes Yes Yes
Yes Yes No
Yes Yes Yes
Yes No No
Yes No No
Yes Yes No
(if dependent
teenager)
Yes Yes No
Yes Yes Yes
Yes Yes Yes
Yes Yes Yes
Yes No No

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

194 Brief Reports

Sterilization, on the other hand, is much
more readily available. Sterilization prerequisites are usually set by hospital staffs
and again tend to be more conservative
than a consensus of sympathy would be.
Recent progress has been made in that
public or private patients are now offered
sterilization for mental retardation or congenital defects in most urban centers. Abor
Social Biology

tion coupled with sterilization is also
readily offered under these circumstances.

The foregoing has been offered as a concise discussion of the prevailing attitudes
and practices of Ob-Gyn’s in regard to
sterilization and abortion. It hopefully
should be of value to social workers, educators, and child-development workers seeking
cooperation from Ob-Gyn’s.

 
