Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

History of the American Eugenics Society

Frederick Osborn

To cite this article: Frederick Osborn (1974) History of the American Eugenics Society, Social
Biology, 21:2, 115-126, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1974.9988099

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1974.9988099

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB arr | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 24
N
Q View related articles 4

wa Citing articles: 3 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

History of the American Eugenics Society

Frederick Osborn

Garrison, New York

The American Eugenics Society was incorporated in 1926, the end product, and
ultimately the sole survivor, of a number
of organizational efforts intended to promote and channel the interests of American eugenists. The period 1904 through
1926 saw a swell in eugenic promotions
both in this country and abroad as the new
field of genetics stimulated wide public
interest in human heredity.

In 1904, the Carnegie Institution of
Washington founded at Cold Spring Harbor, Long Island, a Station for Experimental Evolution, under geneticists A. F.
Blakeslee and C. B. Davenport. Later,
Harry H. Laughlin enlisted the interest
of Mrs. E. H. Harriman in founding and
supporting the Eugenics Record Office adjacent to the Carnegie Institution’s Station. The publication of a regular journal
was begun by the Eugenics Record Office
with Volume 1, No. 1, of the Exgenical
News appearing on January 1, 1916. Its
purpose was to provide information on
the activities of the office and its staff,
publish family histories of eugenic interest, and report on research related to
eugenics.! In 1921, the Station for Experi
1JIn 1920, the Eugenical News was acquired by
the Eugenics Research Association, an offshoot of
the Eugenics Record Office, and continued by them
until that organization was discontinued in 1938.
Announced as a bimonthly publication, it was for

 

mental Evolution and the Eugenics Record
Office were combined in the Department of
Genetics of the Carnegie Institution.

In 1906, the Race Betterment Foundation was organized at Battle Creek, Michigan, by John Harvey Kellogg who gave it
a substantial endowment. The Foundation
held three conferences between 1914 and
1928, and in 1928 established a Eugenics
Registry for keeping biological family
records.

At the American Museum of Natural
History, a group including a number of
eminent scientists organized the Galton
Society for the promotion of the study
of racial anthropology and kindred subjects. Francis Galton had established the
Biometric Laboratory in England under
Carl Pearson in 1895 and in 1906 its associated Laboratory for National Eugenics.
Meetings of the Eugenics Education Society in London in 1907 and 1908 were
precursors of the English Eugenics Society,
which like the American Eugenics Society
was to be incorporated in 1926.

In 1912, Major Leonard Darwin sent
out invitations in the name of the Eugenics

a number of years issued monthly. From 1939
through 1953, Eugenical News was continued as
a quarterly and the official organ of the American
Eugenics Society. A complete set of the Eugenical News is on file with the Countway Library of
Medicine at the Harvard Medical Library.

115
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

116

Education Society of Great Britain for the
First International Congress of Eugenics.
The Congress was held in London and
attended by over three-hundred people
from England, Europe, and the United
States. The scientific papers and proceedings of the 1912 congress were recorded
in two official publications.

A Second International Congress of
Eugenics was held in New York in 1921,
sponsored by the Eugenics Record Office
and the American Museum of Natural
History, with Alexander Graham Bell as
Honorary President, Professor Henry Fairfield Osborn as President, and Dr. C. C.
Little as Secretary-General. It was a large
affair, under impressive sponsorship with
an attendance again somewhat over threehundred people. Over 108 scientific papers
were presented, and there were 131 exhibitors. It resulted in the publication of
two volumes of scientific papers, titled
Eugenics, Genetics and the Family and
Eugenics in Race and State, together with
a book of exhibits and an official report.

The idea of an American Eugenics Society originated in 1921 at this Second International Eugenics Congress. Professor
Irving Fisher of Yale pointed out the need
for some means of promoting a popular
educational program in eugenics for the
United States. Dr. Fairfield Osborn, President of the Congress, appointed an Interim Committee, which became the
Eugenics Committee of the United States,
later the Eugenics Society of the United
States, and ultimately, on January 30,
1926, the American Eugenics Society, Inc.
The incorporators were Harry Crampton,
Irving Fisher, Madison Grant, Harry H.
Laughlin, and Henry Fairfield Osborn.
Professor Irving Fisher became the first
President; Dr. Davenport, the first VicePresident; and Professor Henry P. Fairchild, Secretary-Treasurer.

The Society saw a rapid growth in staff

Osborn

Social Biology

and proliferation of committees under the
succeeding presidencies of Irving Fisher
(1926), Roswell Johnson (1927), H. H.
Laughlin (1928), Clarence C. Little
(1929), and Henry Fairchild (1930). The
Society acquired an Executive Secretary,
Mr. Leon Whitney, a Corresponding Secretary, a Field Secretary for the Committee on Legislation, a Secretary for the
Popular Education Committee, a Secretary
for the Committee on Cooperation with
Congress, and a Secretary for the committees on Birth Regulation, Immigration,
and Cooperation with Physicians.

The numerous committees were large
and included many of the prominent
names of the period. The Committee on
Eugenics and Dysgenics of Birth Regulation included highly respected names:
Professor O. E. Baker, Professor E. G.
Conklin, Dr. Robert L. Dickinson, Dr.
Louis I. Dublin, Professor Roswell Johnson, and Dr. Raymond Pearl. The Committee on Cooperation with Clergymen
included such men as Dr. S. Parks Cadman, Harry Emerson Fosdick, Bishop McConnell, Bishop Moore, Rabbi de Sola
Pool, Reverend Guy Emery Shipler, Dr.
Ralph Sockman, and many others of equal
prominence. The Committee on Crime Prevention included Judge Harry Olson, Dr.
A. L. Jacoby, and New York City Chief
of Police Morgan Collins. The Editorial
Committee included Professors Samuel
Jones and Roswell Johnson. Many of the
names on the Finance Committee would
have been appropriate to any large foundation today. The Committee on Cooperation with Physicians included many leading physicians. There was a Committee on
Formal Education, a Committee on the
History and Survey of the Eugenics Movement, a Popular Education Committee, a
Committee on Legislation, and the ill-fated
Committee on Selective Immigration.

In April, 1929, a regional committee in
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 21, No. 2

California was organized as an affiliate
(the Southern California Branch of the
American Eugenics Society), again with
responsible financial and scientific backing.

For some time all of these committees
were quite active. They made surveys, held
meetings, wrote reports, and distributed
publications. Many of these distributed
publications were of a substantial sort,
or at least emanated from authoritative
sources, such as Research Studies of Crime
as Related to Heredity which had been
published by the Chicago Municipal Court
in 1925. The reports of the various committees covered an enormous amount of
ground and represented a great expenditure of effort. Little remains to indicate
the extent of their use or their effect on
public opinion, but the importance of the
men composing the committees and the
activity which they sponsored gives an
idea of the vigor of the early eugenics
movement.”

In addition to the committees, the Society organized an Advisory Council of 110
men and women representing a _ broad
spectrum of society—scientists, university
administrators, church leaders, and many
people of wealth and prominence. It included such impressive names as Mrs. Otto
H. Kahn; Mrs. Helen Hartley Jenkins;
Dean Virginia Gildersleeve of Teacher’s
College; Dr. Carl Brigham; Dr. Edward
Thorndike; President J. C. Merriam of
the Carnegie Institute; Dr. Clark Wister,
Curator of Anthropology in the American
Museum of Natural History; and Dr.
Sewell Wright, a leading American geneticist.

In 1928, the American Eugenics Society

2 The authentic history of the activities of the
eugenics movement in general, and of the American Eugenics Society in particular, is to be found
in publications most of which are still available in
specialized libraries The historical archives of the
Society itself have been deposited with the library
of the American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia.

 

American Eugenics Society

117

began publication of the monthly journal,
Eugenics, with Volume 1, No. 1 appearing
in October, 1928. It was the official organ
of the American Eugenics Society and was
advertised as “The only journal in the
world devoted to a dignified popularization
of the subject of eugenics.” In 1930 publication was taken over by the Galton
Publishing Co., and the journal ceased to
exist with the demise of that company
some time after February, 1931.

In 1930, the Officers of the Society were:
Professor Henry Fairchild, President; Dr.
Irving Fisher, Vice-President; and Professor Roswell Johnson, Secretary and
Treasurer. At the staff level were Leon
Whitney, Executive Secretary, and Lilian
Armstrong, Corresponding Secretary. The
nine members of the board of directors
included six scientists, Drs. C. C. Little,
Henry P. Fairchild, Roswell H. Johnson,
Edward G. Conklin, R. M. MaclIver, and
Irving Fisher, and three nonscientists,
Madison Grant, Harry Laughlin, and
Harry Olson.

The Society had 1,260 members in
1930. They represented every state in the
Union, but by far the largest number came
from New York, followed by California
and Massachusetts. The list of membership is remarkable in two respects. It was
a veritable blue book of prominent and
wealthy men and women and included only
a minimum of professional people in the
scientific fields actually related to eugenics.
A remarkable change was to take place
in this respect in the next thirty years.
By 1960 the Society’s membership was
less than 400, but almost without exception was composed of scientists or medical men.

The changes in the officers and board
of directors over the years was equally
significant. The scientists who were officers
and members of the board in 1930 were
in general heavily involved with large

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

118

general ideas based on subjective evaluations, and with a strong propagandist bent.
Those who constituted the board and its
officers in the 1960’s, whether in genetics,
psychology, or sociology, were scientists
of the new school dealing with the careful analysis of objective material and
holding as their purpose the furthering
of man’s knowledge of the biological and
sociological forces affecting human populations and their evolution.

Over the years, the many committees
organized in the late twenties with such
prominent names remained quiescent, and
from year to year members apparently
dropped off and the committees shrank into
desuetude.

By 1931, when Professor H. F. Perkins
became President, the Society had begun
to lose much of the luster of its association
with prominent people. Perkins had a more
limited acquaintance with influential people than his predecessors, but he was
deeply interested in the Society and able
to give it much of his time and thought.
The annual meetings of the members continued, with increasing discussion of what
should be the program and activities of
the Society.

During Perkins’ term, the Third International Congress of Eugenics, again sponsored by the Eugenics Record Office and
the American Museum of Natural History,
was held in New York in 1932. Attendance
was down to 73. It published one volume,
A Decade of Progress in Eugenics, containing the scientific papers and exhibits.
The papers were of two kinds. More than
half dealt with what one might call eugenics theory, with little statistical or objective support, and carrying some unsupported observations on race and _ social
class. The other group, somewhat smaller
in number, dealt with hereditary variations, particularly defects, and appears to
have represented much of the best knowl
Osborn

 

Social Biology

edge available at that time. It was a
pioneer publication in the field of hereditary defect. Picking at random among the
names of those who presented scientific
papers, we find Raymond Pearl, Frank
Lorimer, Tage Kemp, Dr. H. J. Muller,
Dr. Jon Mjoem, C. C. Hurst, and Morris
Steggerda.

While Professor Perkins was President
(1931-33), close contacts were maintained
with the Birth Control League, predecessor
of Planned Parenthood, and with the recently formed Population Association of
America. Professor Fairchild, then president of the Population Association of
America, proposed that the Birth Control
League, the American Eugenics Society,
and the Population Association of America
be combined in a single organization. His
proposal gained some support in each organization, but the more general feeling
was that whatever efficiencies of operation
might be gained by the combination, there
would be a loss in clarity of purpose. The
proposal fell through, but the fact that it
was made and seriously considered gives
evidence of the sense of insecurity felt by
all three organizations in the early days.

The results of Professor Perkins’ more
thoughtful approach were soon evident.
During his presidency a manuscript of
some hundred pages was prepared to be
distributed to all members of the Society
under the title “Who Is Your Heir? The
Answer of Eugenics.” We can find no record that “Who Is Your Heir” was actually completed and mailed out to members
of the Society; but by 1935 the manuscript had been reduced to a brief Eugenics Catechism, some 12 or 15 pages
in length, and was given a considerable
circulation. The catechism, which was
largely Ellsworth Huntington’s work, sets
out in question and answer form a number of propositions. There is no mention
of race. The question of social class differDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No. 2

ences is treated with respect. Many of the
answers would be quite acceptable today
with a slight change in emphasis to give
a balanced rather than a propagandist
picture. To the question, which counts for
more, heredity or environment, the catechism gives the proper though simplistic
answer, “they are interdependent.” But
in regard to crime, pauperism, and immigration, there are strong biases heavily
overstating the effect of genetic variations
and a careless reading might extend these
biases to social class differences. The
catechism contains a strong plea for the
filing of family pedigrees. It is concerned
with the decline in the birth rate and urges
that “superior” families bear at least four
children. It states that abortion, except on
strict mental grounds, is murder. It urges
the holding of “fitter families” competitions throughout the United States.
Professor Ellsworth Huntington was the
Society’s President from 1934 to 1938. A
geographer at Yale University, Huntington was deeply interested in eugenics and
had been associated with Irving Fisher
and others active in the Society’s work. In
the twenties he was active with other
members of the Society in urging restrictions on immigration. Starting with what
was then called “negative eugenics,” he
had become by the time of his presidency
particularly interested in increasing the
number of children among the “better”
families. He was convinced that eugenically less able people were in the ascendance and wondered if democracy itself
would be able to survive. He was a prolific
writer. While President of the Society he
published Tomorrow’s Children, The Goal
of Eugenics and A Eugenic Program for
the United States. During his presidency
he established an Educational Committee
of the Society (1937) seeking to develop
eugenic causes in schools and colleges. Its
activities were short-lived, but within the

American Eugenics Society

119

Society there was a continuing interest
and discussion of the Society’s purposes
and methods.

In May, 1937, following the publication
of the catechism, the Society had held a
“Conference of Experts,” to “talk about
what each of us believes to be the way in
which to make the most progress.” The
basis for the discussion was a statement
prepared by the President, Ellsworth
Huntington, and the Secretary, Frederick
Osborn, which read “the children of the
U.S. must be born of parents who will provide the biological inheritance and the
home conditions necessary for the development of character, physique, and intelligence.” Chairman Huntington reported
that Dr. Davenport, who was unable to be
present, objected to this statement on the
grounds that it overlooked the importance
of heredity. It was apparent that many
of the early eugenists felt that any introduction of environmental influences weakened the eugenic approach. (They forgot,
perhaps, that Galton once defined eugenics
as “the study of factors under social control.’’)

Dr. Barbara Burks spoke hopefully
about the possibilities of negative eugenics.
She found the future of positive eugenics
clouded because of the difficulty of measuring specific traits in individuals. But
she added “I do feel, however, that we can
say within a group of families that fulfill
certain criteria we will get more eugenically desirable children than we will out:
of another group of families who fail to
meet these criteria.” She then goes on to
consider the advantages of specific grants
for chosen families and of a graded family
allowance system. Neither she nor any of
those present considered the possibility
that a eugenically desirable distribution of
births might occur on a voluntary basis
under the improvement of social conditions
and the wider use of birth control.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

120

Dr. Lorimer expressed the hope that the
word “eugenics” might become understood as representing a great humanitarian
motive, an attempt in effect to enlarge the
opportunities of life and improve the basic
condition of living. He urged the evaluation of public programs in their effect on
trends in population composition.

Dr. Louis Dublin, representing views
increasingly held by the public at large,
attacked the eugenic movement for its
background, and while much of what he
said was as exaggerated as were the statements of the eugenists of a previous time,
he is worth quoting as an example of a
widely held liberal opinion of that time:

This movement was badly born... of British

scientists and biologists . . . belonging to a

society which is horribly stratified. They

launched the movement on the assumption
that the only way open to the developing of

a better society was through eugenic influ
ences, The movement was cursed from the

outset by the assumption that the only sure
way to a better world was through the processes of selection and breeding—which
would take eons of time. This objective for
better social order can be achieved very,
very quickly (by entirely other means) and
with a pretty clear assurance of where we
are coming out.
The means Dr. Dublin proposed were
better education, housing, recreation, better medical care, and better wages. In
later years, Dr. Dublin became converted
to the need for a eugenic trend in births
and became an ardent supporter of the
movement in its changed form,

Dr. Norman Hines pointed out that the
eugenic idea long antedated Darwin and
Galton. He proposed a housecleaning of
eugenics by subordinating, if not casting
out, the extreme left-wing hereditarians
“without at the same time making such
excessive concessions to the environmentalists and social conditioners as to make us
lose our identity or our essential purpose.”

During the winter of 1937, the Society
held four conferences on the relation of

ee ss

Osborn

Social Biology

eugenics to the fields of recreation, nursing,
education, and medicine. The conferences
were attended by a considerable number
of people well known in these respective
fields. They were reported on and summarized by Weaver Pangburn for recreation, by Alta Dines for nursing, by Henry
Noble McCracken and Lawrence K. Frank
for education, and by Dr. Haven Emerson
for medicine. The meetings were evidently
under able sponsorship. The papers were
excellent and aroused interesting discussions. However, there was no follow-up,
and this first attempt to relate eugenics
with social activities made no permanent
mark.

Nonetheless, the Conference on Medicine produced an unexpected by-product
in the field of defects. Dr. William Allen
of Charlotte, North Carolina, a member
of the Eugenics Society, attended the
meeting on Eugenics and Medicine and
presented a paper on his studies of defect
among the mountain people in the Appalachians. This was one of the few spots
in the United States where hereditary disease could be located in adequate quantity
and studied. Interest in Dr. Allen’s paper
was enhanced by his unusual qualities of
character and competence. The Society
sent its Secretary into the field with Dr.
Allen, and in April, 1939, obtained a grant
of $5,000 from the Carnegie Corporation
of New York for Dr. Allen to enlarge his
work, Additional grants were received
from the Carnegie Corporation at the request of the Society which by 1941 made
it possible to set up a Department of Medical Genetics in the enlarged Wake Forest
Medical School, newly named the Bowman-Gray School of Medicine. Dr. Allen
took the Chair of Medical Genetics provided by these grants and trained an able
assistant, Dr. Nash Herndon, who for 30
years has been one of the country’s leading
medical geneticists. Dr. Allen died April

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No. 2

24, 1943, a pioneer in establishing the
study of genetics in an American school
of medicine.

The discussions which took place at
the meeting of the Society in May, 1937,
immediately following these conferences,
indicate that, though the Society was going
through a period of change and reassessment, it was making an honest attempt to
define its aims in the light of then available knowledge. The search continued under the presidency (1938-40) of Dr. S. J.
Holmes with the publication of the pamphlets Practical Eugenics in 1938 and
American Eugenics Today in 1940. They
repeated in improved form the program
for negative eugenics. With respect to positive eugenics, they made clear for the first
time that “the larger program of eugenics
cannot logically be based on social class or
economic or racial distinctions.” They went
on to urge a wider spread of birth control,
the removal of handicaps to having and
rearing children, and the need for reorienting human values. They pointed out that
the broader program of eugenics was a
corollary to environmental improvement
and conformed to environmental aspirations and democratic ideals.

After a lapse of some eight years since
the demise of the monthly journal Eugenics, the Society again began to sponsor
an official publication. When the Eugenics
Research Association was discontinued,
their monthly publication Eugenical News
was transferred to the American Eugenics
Society. The Society continued its publication as a quarterly and as the official organ
of the Society, with the first issue, Volume
24, No. 1, appearing in 1939 and the last,
Volume 38, No. 4, in December, 1953.

The publication of the 1938 and 1940
pamphlets and the presentation of eugenics
at conferences held in many parts of the
country marked the end of the Society’s
work in the prewar period. Dr. Maurice A.

 

American Eugenics Society 121

Bigelow became President in 1940. The
officers and members of the Society were
soon, like the rest of the United States,
caught up in the activities of World War
II. Contributions ceased coming in. Membership declined. Rudolph Bertheau, then
Executive Secretary, resigned, and the office was abolished in 1942. Almost alone,
with great dedication and personal cost,
Dr. Bigelow, during the five years of his
presidency, carried the Society through
the war period. A desk was retained for the
Society in the offices of the American
Social Hygiene Association in New York,
and the Society’s books and papers were
stored at the home of Professor Bigelow
at Croton-On-Hudson, New York. The Society’s receipts declined from over $6,000
in 1941 to $3,000 in 1942, and under
$1,500 in each of the years 1943, 1944,
and 1945, At the beginning of 1946, available cash was down to $829.64, only two
or three hundred members remained, and
the circulation of Eugenical News was under 300.

In 1946 Frederick Osborn was elected
President to serve for a five-year term. He
was called to the State Department in
1947 and had little time to devote to the
Society until 1950. From the minutes of
the Board at their meeting in November,
1947, we read that “all those present
agreed that the time was not right for
aggressive eugenic propaganda or any aggressive campaign for increased membership; there should be a period during
which the Society should be a forum for
thinking out the problems of eugenics
with the help of a well-informed audience, and the Eugenical News should be
continued as a digest.’”’ At the same time,
the office of the American Eugenics Society was moved to the fifteenth floor of
230 Park Avenue, where it was to remain
for over 26 years.

Beginning in 1949 efforts were made to
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

122

raise substantial sums in the form of
grants in order to give the Society some
financial base for its work. Grants were
received from the Dodge Foundation, the
Population Council, the Draper Fund, and
later from the Milbank Memorial Fund.
At the same time substantial contributions
came in from individuals. By January,
1953, the Society had capital assets of over
$27,000, and for the next twenty years
continued in receipt of grants and contributions sufficient for a moderate but continuing operation.

In 1951 the trustees appointed Mrs.
Helen Hammons to the office of Managing
Editor, working in the Society’s office,
with Mr, Osborn as President and later
Secretary of the Society. The term of Mrs.
Hammons as Managing Editor from 1951—
60 marked a period of renewed activity
and accomplishment in the publications
of the Society. In 1953 the publication of
Eugenical News was discontinued and in
1954 the Society began publication of the
journal Eugenics Quarterly devoted to scientific articles, particularly in the field
of hereditary defect.

Shortly after the war it became evident
that the medical profession, particularly
those members engaged in teaching and
medical research, had come to realize the
importance of genetic variations in relation to a great number of diseases, defects,
and abnormalities. For years the Society
had been preaching that the field of negative eugenics was the responsibility of
medicine and public health. A new tide
seemed to be running in favor of such a
development, and the Society moved to
make its contribution.

As early as 1948 the Society had begun
distributing pamphlets and reprints of scientific articles on hereditary defects and
diseases. In the two years, 1956 and 1957,
12,065 copies were sold in bulk, and 1,846
copies were sold to individuals, in addition

Osborn

Social Biology

to those distributed free to authors and
for general promotion. Many of these were
reprints from the Eugenics Quarterly, and
the sale of authoritatively written reprints
and pamphlets greatly exceeded their distribution through the sale of the Eugenics
Quarterly itself. The attractive pamphlet
Heredity Counseling, prepared by Helen
Hammons, had large sales in bulk and
single copies, continuing well into the
1960’s.

To fill the need for qualified research
workers in medical schools, the Society
proposed to the Population Council the
award of four medical genetics fellowships
providing for postgraduate work in medicine by geneticists or postgraduate work
in genetics by men with medical degrees.
Of the four fellowship recipients, one became geneticist at the Yale School of
Medicine and one at the medical school
at the University of Virginia. Further
funds were provided by the Population
Council for two fellowships in 1960.

In 1956, under the Presidency of Dr.
Harry Shapiro (1955-64), the Society
joined in a conference in Philadelphia on
marriage and the family, exposing a large
marriage counseling group to the views
of competent medical people on the need
for genetic advice in marriage counseling.
In 1957 the Society held its first major
conference on genetics in medical practice
and heredity counseling at the New York
Academy of Medicine. It was attended by
over a hundred professional people and
aroused much interest. In 1959, the medical book division of Harper and Brothers
published the proceedings of the Society’s
1957 symposium at the New York Academy of Medicine under the title Heredity
Counseling, with a foreword by Dr. John
C. Bugher.

In 1959 the Society held an international conference on differentiation in current fertility trends, again at the New York

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No. 2

Academy of Medicine. The large attendance at the open meetings required
the use of the large auditorium at the
Academy. Finally, in 1961, the Society
held a conference on the teaching of
genetics to medical students at the Rockefeller Institution in New York City, jointly
sponsored with the Population Council.

Publicity given the American Eugenics
Society by these conferences and by the
articles of medical columnists resulted
from time to time in large numbers of
individual inquiries cn hereditary defects.
On these, the Society acted as a referral
agency, supplying lists of heredity clinics
in the United States and abroad where
specific advice and counseling could be
sought. The American Eugenics Society
was the first to publish lists of such counseling centers, their earliest listing showing
27 clinics in the United States. By 1969
the listing of counseling centers and
genetic services had been taken over by
the National Foundation, with an annual
publication listing several hundred centers.

During this period, the Society had some
part, through its medical genetics committee, in organizing a number of teaching
and research meetings and symposiums
ranging from evening lectures in connection
with the New York Academy of Medicine
to a symposium held at Colorado Springs
under the administration of the Cornell
Medical School. The most important of
such meetings was that held in 1961 which
helped inaugurate the Bar Harbor summer
courses in medical genetics at the Jackson
Laboratories in Bar Harbor, Maine.
Grants for travel expenses to the first
meeting were obtained from the Population Council in 1960 and again in 1961
and 1962. This conference thereafter became well established and supported by
the National Institutes of Health and later
by the National Foundation.

It is hard to assess the part played by

 

 

American Eugenics Society 123

the American Eugenics Society in the acceptance by the fields of medicine and public health of responsibility for developing
the field of genetic defect. Prior to 1949
the Society had been a Jone and ineffective
voice. Through the 1950’s it concentrated
its grants and conferences in this field and
made available several tens of thousands
of dollars for this purpose. By the early
1960’s, no important medical school was
without teaching and research personnel
in the field of human genetics, and variations in heredity were recognized as factors not only in gross defects and deficiencies but in many other aspects of mental
and physical ill health. By 1961 it was evident that support of medical genetics need
no longer be the major activity of the Society.

The field of work on which the American Eugenics Society placed major emphasis in the 1960’s during the presidency of
Dr. Harry Shapiro and that of Dr. Clyde
C. Kiser and the journal editorship of Dr.
Richard H. Osborne, can best be described
by the following quotation from the Society’s Five-year Report for 1960-1964:

In December, 1961, the Eugenics Quarterly published a “Statement of the Eugenic
Position,” the report of a committee of the
Society comprising five leading men from
the fields of anthropology, demography, behavior genetics, medical genetics, and Mendelian genetics. The report noted that some
90 per cent of all fecund American couples
use some form of family limitation at some
time in their married lives and that with
expected improvements in methods of birth
control, we may be approaching a society
in which all children are quite specifically
“wanted” children. While this would not of
itself make for eugenic trends in births, it
would at least make possible policies for
eugenic birth selection based on voluntary
controls.

Preliminary to developing policies for “‘influencing the future course of evolution,” it
seemed desirable to find out what is the
present direction of human evolution in the
United States and, if possible, in other areas
as well. This new field of scientific interest
is as yet very little developed. In the past

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

124.

several years there have been a number of
conferences on the direction of human evolution, generally attended by geneticists and
anthropologists. Lacking demographic data,
the discussions have been highly theoretical.
Mating habits and birth differentials among
drosophila do not provide analogies applicable to man in an urban civilization nor in
any other form of human society. On the
demographic side, the data accumulated in
population studies have never been adequately analyzed for their genetic significance.

Following on the publication of the
“Statement of the Eugenic Position,” the
Society organized a workshop conference
of geneticists and demographers to discuss
their common interest in trends in human
evolution. The meeting was held in Princeton in the fall of 1964 and was followed
by Princeton Conferences held each fall
through 1969, a total of five in all. At the
first meeting in 1964, considerable time
was spent in the search for a common
meaning in the words used by geneticists
and demographers respectively (for example, “fecundity” was used by geneticists
to signify what demographers called “fertility”). There was agreement on the need
for men trained in both disciplines, and the
recommendation of the conference in this
respect resulted in the granting of several
graduate fellowships in population genetics.

The Second Princeton Conference was
held in the fall of 1965 and included psychologists and behavioral geneticists. Its
purpose was, in the words of the rapporteur
Dr. Dudley Kirk, “To bring the experience
and wisdom of several disciplines to bear
on the problem of determining the selective forces which operate to change gene
frequencies.” Dr. Kirk said that “for the
last twenty-five years or so we have seen
an overwhelming tide of sociological and
social determination which has almost monopolized thinking on these questions in
the social sciences. We are engaged here
in an attempt to break through our respec
Osborn

 

Social Biology

tive intellectual isolates, whether in genetics, psychology, or sociology.”

The Second Princeton Conference was
centered on the discussion of two research
proposals: “A Proposed Study of 30,000
Menonites in Mexico,” by Gordon Allen,
and “The Wisconsin Study of Students
and Families” by Richard H. Osborne. The
several disciplines were brought to bear
fruitfully on the plans for these studies.
After the First Princeton Conference, there
had been a feeling that the population geneticists and the demographers were talking past each other. At the end of the second conference, one of the demographers
remarked, “I found the psychologists here
lucid and germane and even felt that I understood what Lewontin and Allen (both
geneticists) were saying.”

The Third Princeton Conference in 1966
was attended by 10 demographers, 14 geneticists, 4 anthropologists, 3 psychologists, and a computer specialist. This conference also considered the planning of
several studies on relatively isolated populations. Again, there was a marked improvement in the ability of the members
of this interdisciplinary group to understand each other.

At the Fourth Princeton Conference in
1967, five papers were presented on assortative mating. The meeting was notable in
that the discussions were carried out without reference to the particular disciplines
represented.

The Fifth Princeton Conference was
held in November, 1969, under the title
“The Genetic Reconstruction of Human
Populations.”” Nine papers were presented.
An outside observer would have found it
difficult to note that those taking part had
been trained in different scientific disciplines. It was as though a new discipline
were being developed in the field of current
trends in human evolution.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 21, No. 2

These conferences greatly enlarged the
basis of interdisciplinary eugenic thinking.
As a practical matter, they helped to develop a program of research grants for
which funds were provided by other foundations. The excellent scientific papers
from these Conferences, published in the
Eugenics Quarterly, later Social Biology,
gave the journal a broader base of contributors and readership, But perhaps the
most important result of the Princeton
Conferences was that they gave those taking part a new sense of their community
of interest in the interdisciplinary field of
genetic trends.

In the fall of 1970, the Society in its annual fall conference went back, after an
interval of nine years, to the field of defect with a symposium on “Differential
Reproduction in Individuals with Mental
and Physical Disorders.” This symposium
marked the first attempt to bring together
demographers and medical geneticists for
discussion of the reproductive rates of
hereditary defectives. The meeting aroused
much interest, and its excellent papers and
discussions were compiled in a 133 page
Supplement to Volume 18 of Social Biology, published in September, 1971.

Between 1960 and 1970 the Society
strengthened its position as a center for
bringing together various scientific disciplines in a common interest in present
trends in human evolution. Highly competent men from related fields were
brought on the board of directors, and the
membership increasingly took on the character of other organizations of scientisis.
By the end of the decade, the Society was
in a position to obtain a larger participation from its members. All members were
invited to the symposium held in the fall
of 1970 at Rockefeller University, and the
general meeting of members for the election of directors was held at the same time.

American Eugenics Society

125

In the same year, the officers of the Society
helped to organize the international Behavior Genetics Association.

A major symposium was held in the fall
of 1971 at the American Museum of Natural History in New York under the joint
sponsorship of the Museum and the Society
on the subject “Human Evolution—Past,
Present, and Future.” The Committee in
charge included: Dr. Theodosius Dobzhansky, Chairman of the Board of Directors;
Dr. Harry Shapiro, Curator of Anthropology at the American Museum of Natural
History; Dr. David Sills, Chief, Demographic Division of the Population Council; and Dr. Carl Bajema, Secretary of the
American Eugenics Society.

The first day, five papers were presented
on man’s evolutionary past beginning with
fossil evidence presented by Richard
Leakey and going on through the evolution
of races, of human behavior, and of natural selection and differential population
growth. There were six papers on the continuing evolution of man on the second
day, bringing together many of the men
who had cooperated in the Princeton Conferences. Man’s evolutionary future was
considered on the third day which covered
major trends in population growth and distribution and new developments in genetics. The papers from this symposium
were published in 1972 in Social Biology,
Vol. 19, Nos, 2, 3, and 4.

As it looked back on its fourth decade
of active life, the American Eugenics Society could take a moderate but substantial
satisfaction in the progress made during
that period. Problems of hereditary defects
and deficiencies, mental and physical, had
at last become the responsibility of medicine and public health. The Society’s hopes
and efforts had seen fruition in the establishment of medical genetics research centers in all of the larger medical schools, and
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

126 Osborn

in the proliferation of heredity counseling
clinics. It had held five interdisciplinary
conferences, firmly establishing the cooperative nature of work on human evolution.
It was free to move into the next decade
with its major interest the definition of
generational trends and changes in gene
frequencies and distributions, and the factors which might bring them about.
Through conferences and the publications of scientists from many different
fields, stirred by an explosion of knowledge
in the science of genetics, and by advances
in demography, anthropology, and psychology, the Society was groping for wholly
new definitions of its purpose. It was no
longer thinking in terms of “superior” individuals, “superior” family stocks, or even
of the social conditions which would bring
about a “better” distribution of births. It
was thinking in terms of the importance of
diversity; in terms of the genetic attributes
appropriate to different kinds of physical
and social environments; in terms of a society in which different breeding groups
were making genetic adaptations appropri
Social Biology

ate to the needs of different environments.
It was discarding the old criteria and beginning to sense a relationship between
eugenics and the survival not only of Homo
sapiens but also—because heredity and environment are not two parts but an inseparable whole—the survival of those forms
of civilization which promise a more secure
and a more abundant life. It was thinking
in terms of bio-cultural evolution.

To reflect this thinking more explicitly,
the title of the Society journal was changed
in 1969 from Eugenics Quarterly to Social
Biology. Similarly, in 1972, the Society
changed its name to the Society for the
Study of Social Biology. As the announcement in the journal of this change stated:

The change of name of the Society does not
coincide with any change of its interests or
policies. Such a change was marked rather
by the founding of this journal twenty years
ago. The common interests that have long
united the membership, and to which their
scientific disciplines are relevant, are the
trends of human evolution and the biological, medical, and social forces that determine these trends.

 
