Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Biosocial factors influencing women to become
prostitutes in India

Molly Chattopadhyay , S. Bandyopadhyay & C. Duttagupta

To cite this article: Molly Chattopadhyay , S. Bandyopadhyay & C. Duttagupta (1994) Biosocial
factors influencing women to become prostitutes in India, Social Biology, 41:3-4, 252-259, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1994.9988876

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1994.9988876

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB ann | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 24
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 4 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:46
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

Brief Reports

Biosocial Factors Influencing
Women to Become Prostitutes
in India

 

“Molly Chattopadhyay, °S. Bandyopadhyay, and °C. Duttagupta

“Sociological Research Unit, ’Biochemistry Research Unit and Biometry Research Unit,
Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta 700 035, India

ABSTRACT: Based on materials collected during a study of risk factors associated with cervix
cancer among prostitutes in Domjur, Howrah, West Bengal, this report explores various biosocial
factors which may lead women to prostitution. When family and marital ties fail or disintegrate
for various reasons, the life situations which a woman encounters may themselves generate a
“process” of anchorlessness. The failure of family support along with the Jack of ability to
provide for themselves due to poverty and illiteracy were key factors why the women in this study

 

had adopted prostitution.

An exploratory study on the risk
factors associated with cervical cancer
is underway in a semi-industrial township of Domjur, Howrah, India. The
purpose of the study is to determine
whether there 1s any relationship between various biosocial factors (e.g.,
sex behavior, other demographic and
environmental characteristics) and
cervix cancer among females who are
prostitutes. For the purpose of the
study, a prostitute is defined as a female who offers her body for sexual intercourse in exchange for cash or goods
as her source of livelihood.

The present communication analyzes information on the _ biosocial
backgrounds and behaviors of the
prostitutes collected in the course of
the cervical cancer study. An important point to be noted is that the analyses were made through continuous interaction among the biologists and
sociologists on the study team and also
with the prostitutes. The presentation

will focus on the variables in a “‘process” which has led these women to accept their present life. Earlier studies
on Indian prostitution (Duttagupta,
1964; Punekar and Rao, 1961; Joarder,
1964) did not direct attention to the
processes by which a woman eventually found herself making her livelihood through prostitution.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Selection of Subjects.—In _ this
population-based study, we intended
to interview all prostitutes in Ghoshpara. In reality, this mission was difficult to execute. Both screening for the
detection of cervix cancer and the collection of background information are
sensitive in nature. Several prostitutes
refused to discuss their profession with
an outsider. However, for the clinical
intervention arranged by the project
leader with the cooperation of Bagha
Jatin State General Hospital at Jadav
252

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 41, No. 3-4

pur (Calcutta), rapport with the prostitutes had been painstakingly established.

The study was also limited by other
factors. There was no specific time
when the interviewers could find the
study subjects free to talk with them.
Often the interview was interrupted
and could not be pursued further. Also
the prostitutes’ neighborhood was further disturbed by the work of a nongovernmental voluntary organization
on a “detection of AIDS” program.
The prostitutes perceived the AIDS
program as threatening the disruption
or end of their only source of livelihood. Our study then was also seen as
a threat. As a result, out of total number of approximately 300 prostitutes,
60 allowed us to make some kind of
contact with them, and 33 finally participated in the study. The rest refused
to talk.

Techniques of Data Collection.—
For the collection of data, we used a
structured questionnaire and in-depth
case histories. Socioeconomic, demographic, and general information was
collected through structured question
naires. Information concerning their

profession and background was obtained by in-depth case histories.

Location of Study. —The survey was
confined to the Ghoshpara Block Panchayat of Domjur, Howrah District,
West Bengal, located in a central region of the town and easily accessible
by trains and buses.

The data were collected by interviews with the prostitutes. While the
facts that they reported could not be
verified, for reasons of financial and
time constraints, the qualitative and
quantitative data were cross-checked
several times during the study period

Brief Reports

 

253

for their internal consistencies. The
data generated in the course of the
study have been used to formulate a
few hypotheses, since there is a paucity
of analytical investigation in this area.

RESULTS

The findings are presented in three
parts: the background of the prostitutes; the reasons why they became
prostitutes; and their living conditions,
including their health.

BACKGROUNDS OF THE PROSTITUTES

Place of Birth.—The prostitutes of
Ghoshpara are mostly from rural areas. Only 3 per cent are from the local
area. Those who were ‘“‘forced”’ into
prostitution have been shifted to places
far from their homes for reasons of anonymity as well as of there being less
chance of their being recognized and
rescued. In the case of women who are
voluntarily participating in prostitution, anonymity is also sought, perhaps
for more complex reasons of feelings
of the social indignity they know is
attached to their profession.

Religion and Sect.—The respondents are mostly Hindus (84.8 per
cent). Among the Hindu respondents,
72.7 per cent are of lower castes.

Literacy. —Only 2 prostitutes are literate, and the remaining 31 are without any formal education. This finding
makes a strong case for compulsory
education for girls, not with a view to
make them merely “literate,” but to
enable them to educate themselves
about the realities of adult life and to
enable them to earn an independent
living if required at a time of crisis.

Last Occupation Before Becoming a
Prostitute.—Information on the full

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

254

occupational histories of the prostitutes could not be obtained. Only their
last occupation was given. Among
these occupations, working for domestic services, aS a casual laborer, and as
a farm laborer were repeated often. A
variety of reasons was given by the respondents for leaving the last occupation. The most frequent reason was
that they had to provide sexual services
at their work place. Under these situations, they chose to adopt prostitution
directly as providing better pay for
what they had to do anyway.

Family Relations.—A number of
prostitutes maintain contact with their
family by visiting their relatives at least
once a year. Respondents seem to have
recognized the value of family relations
after initially having drifted away from
their families and entered into their
profession.

Marital Status. Of the 33 respondents, 21 have been married, and 12
never married. Three of the previously
married respondents had premarital
sexual exposure.

Age of Marriage. —The respondents
were mostly married within their own
communities and to men of their own
social and economic levels. About 36
per cent of the respondents were married by the age of 12~14. It appears
that more than 50 per cent of the marriages were solemnized, disobeying the
provisions of the Child Marriage Restraint (Amendment) Act, 1978, which
makes the age of 18 years the youngest
age of marriage for a girl. About 10 per
cent of the married respondents were
married before they attained puberty.

Unmarried Respondents. — Various
reasons were given by the unmarried
respondents for not getting married,
for example, “no money for dowry,”

Brief Reports

Social Biology

“no one to marry,” “do not want to get
married,” etc.

Entering Into Prostitution. —Over
half of the prostitutes took on the profession by the time they were 25 years
of age. The modal age group was 2025. One-third had engaged in some
form of illicit sex before entering into
the profession. Two-thirds had become
prostitutes without such an intermediary stage.

Reaction of the Respondents’
Relatives. —The majority reported that
their relatives had no knowledge that
they had become prostitutes at the beginning of their professional life. However, nearly one-fourth of the prostitutes later had relatives visit them
despite their knowledge of the woman’s profession.

REASONS WHY THE WOMEN BECAME
PROSTITUTES

There is a widespread belief that
prostitution in India is adopted as a
means of earning a living because of
poverty. Poverty may be an important
factor, but the fact remains that all
poor women are not prostitutes. Thus,
prostitution as a livelihood must be
adopted as part of a process that includes a number of factors. While it is
difficult to isolate contributory factors,
we attempted to identify such factors
among the respondents in the present
study. It was possible to sort out a few
major causes which either precipitated
a woman’s entry into prostitution or
made her vulnerable to accepting the
life of prostitution.

The interaction of various life
events and the women’s reactions to
them fall into two main categories,
each of which has two subcategories
(see Table 1). Type I comprised

 
—|
=
©
N
mei
oO
=
oO
oO
oO
A
CO
©
\O
v.
om
=
—
wo
‘gt
ws
OD
ot
oo
O
S
Ce
©
>>
—
N
mi
oO
>
—
c
=
va)
O
cv
oO
ca
So
©
—
c
Ss
©
A

TABLE 1

CONDITIONS LEADING WOMEN IN GHOSHPARA Domjur, WEST BENGAL TO PROSTITUTION

Types
Predisposing Condition
Type I: Forced

(A) ...ceverecceewses Sudden personal
or familial crisis
(Becoming a
widow)

(D)...cceseveeeeeee Oppressive intrafamilial environment after marriage

NO... .ceeeceeseeees
Type II: Chosen
2 hae conarsonescacen wm ...  Self-initiated
uncontrolled life
(D)...ccsceeceseeves Sexual urges
NO iss cas sxae vane caves
Total No..........6

Initiated by

Death of principal
provider, ¢€.g.,
husband

Recurring ill
treatment by husband and/or in-laws

Desire for easy life

Sexual usage and
curiosity

CONDITIONS

Contributory Cause

Inability to support
by in-laws or parental family

Refusal of parental
family to take back
due to poverty

Impact of local
neighborhood

Aggravating Situation

No economic
provision for survival

Looking for a job

None

None

Catalytic Factor

Deception by a
male acquaintance

(1) Sexual
exploitation at
place of work
(2) Rape

None

None

No. oF
PROSTITUTES

17

12

33

 

P-€ ‘ON “Th “190A

syoday Jong

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

256

women who were either (a) widowed
or (b) abused by husbands and in-laws,
which left them without social or economic support. Type II is comprised of
women who chose prostitution (a) as
an easy way to support themselves or
(b) because of their own sexual urges
and curiosity.

Type I (a)—Critical situations arose
for 17 women when their husbands
died, and no family members or friends
came to their aid. At that vulnerable
moment, they were influenced or deceived by local males, which was the
intervening factor that led them into
prostitution. An example is the case
of M.

M was married at the age of 16 and lived
with her husband for five years. She had
two children. Her husband passed away.
She was not working, and none of her
family members came to her support.
While she was in this vulnerable position, a male approached her with the
pretext of finding her a job. In actuality,
he “‘sold” her, which eventually landed
her in the prostitute’s quarter.

Type I (b)—Ill-treatment by husband and in-laws led 4 women into
prostitution. Instead of finding protection in marriage, many young married
girls are beaten, forced to starve, and
abused. In 3 cases, ill-treatment plus
family poverty led to prostitution; in
the fourth case, ill-treatment plus rape
were the precipitating factors.

A’s case exemplifies the types of situations in which 3 women found themselves.

A’s father died when she was a child.
The family lived in Bangladesh. Being
the eldest daughter, she had to assume
responsibility for her mother and three
brothers and sisters. She was married
against her will and faced ill-treatment
from her husband. She left her husband

Brief Reports

 

Social Biology

and went back to live with her mother
where she worked as an agricultural laborer. To earn more money, she came
to India and worked as a mason.

A boyfriend took her to Delhi, promising to marry her. There she discovered
that he was already married. Thereafter, he arranged a job as a housemaid
for her. She was sexually exploited here
again by the landlord and became pregnant. She went back to Bangladesh, had
an abortion, and came back to India in
search of jobs.

A friend told her about the sex profession and about this locality. She entered into the profession on her own.
She was clear in her mind that nobody
had forced her into prostitution. She
felt that if she had to provide sexual services at her workplace, it was better to
become a paid prostitute where she
could earn money for her future. She
sends money to her mother. Two of her
sisters are staying at a “family residence” (grihastha-bari) next to her lane.
She also has taken responsibility for
their welfare.

In the fourth case, ill-treatment in
marriage and later rape and abduction
contributed to P becoming a prostitute.

P was married in Benaras. Her brotherin-law and mother-in-law used to beat
her on any pretext. She carries a scar on
her right hand as a mark of the in-laws’
torture. Her husband always sided
with “his family,” i.e., his mother and
brother. She left the house, came to
Shibpur, Howrah, and worked as a domestic maid. One day, at the time of returning home from her work, she was
raped and landed in a hotel. She serviced the hoteliers for a few months,
then came to the prostitutes’ quarter on
her own.

Type II (a)—In 9 cases, a view of
prostitution as an easier life than the
alternatives influenced the women. For
S, the absence of physical labor in the

 
 

Vol. 41, No. 3-4

life of a prostitute was the major at
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

traction, accompanied by other environmental influences.

S never liked to work from the time she
was a child. She belonged to a very poor
family. Her father was unable to get her
married into a well-off family. Environmental influences imbued‘in her mind
the idea that prostitution could provide

Brief Reports

her with an easy life without much hard |

work. She came to this quarter on her
own. She has the approval of her father,
as is evident from his frequent visits to
see his daughter.

Type II (b)—Having failed to control their sexual urge, as expected by
the society, and influenced by various
other factors (such as being raised in
a brothel, etc.), 3 respondents chose
prostitution as their way of life. Sexual
urge was a major predisposing factor in
the case of PB.

PB was brought up in a prostitutes’
quarter. Her parents were running a
brothel. Later, she became a prostitute.
Her parents did not find any stigma attached to their daughter’s adopting the
profession. She had a steady boyfriend
who was holding a job and wanted her to
give up prostitution. She had decided
not to give it up because sexual variation
was very important to her.

PRESENT LIFE OF THE PROSTITUTES

Length of Time.— Almost one-fifth
of the respondents had been prostitutes for over 15 years. These prostitutes seem to have put in fairly long
years in the profession. This finding
deviates from the popular belief that
the professional life of prostitutes is
usually short.

Age Structure.—More than half of
the respondents are above 30 years
of age.

 

4

257

Economic Situation. —Prostitution
is as unpredictable and fluctuating a

business as any other, depending upon

several socioeconomic factors. The figures discussed here are based on the
usual income of the respondents. The
largest number of prostitutes earn a
monthly income of about Rs. 1000/-.
They report more competition these
days, since there are too many women
in the profession. Also, living conditions in general have become more expensive, and not many men can afford
to spend money visiting a prostitute.

Number of Clients Per Day.—
Approximately 66 per cent of the prostitutes entertain a maximum number of
five clients per day. Three of the 33
prostitutes have entertained as many as
7-8 clients per day on a regular basis.
The rate ranges from RS.20/-to 150/depending on the client’s duration of
stay.

House Rent.—A majority of the respondents: spend RS. 80/- to Rs. 100/per month toward house rent. In this
situation, the prostitutes pay 25 per
cent of their income as commission to
the landlady. Besides income, gifts by
the customers are also valued in terms
of cash, and 25 per cent of the gift value
is commission. The other system of
payment is to pay rent of Rs. 350—-400/per month and no other commission to
the landlady.

Remittance to Families.—Most of
the respondents said that they regularly send remittances to their families.
Many of them have their children
living with their families.

Social Ties.—During the years in
the profession, about 50 per cent of the
respondents have maintained cordial
relations with their native places.
These respondents visit their native

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

258

places at least once in a year just to
visit, in addition to trips made because
of their own illness, the illness of relatives, and during festivals (e.g.,
Durga Puja, Jamaisasthi, etc.) when
they also usually visit their native
places.

Food Habits.—The respondents
were selective in their food habits. Animal proteins (i.e., fish, egg, meat) are
consumed frequently. Leafy vegetables, pulses and legumes, roots and tubers are nonfrequent items. Intake of
alcohol is regular. Usage of tobacco is
mostly as tooth powder.

Interrelationships. —The prostitutes
gave the general impression that girls
in the same quarter maintain cordial
relations amongst themselves and have
“fellow feelings.’ During illness or
pregnancies or when unable to earn
money for other reasons, they were
supported and looked after by other
prostitutes in their neighborhood.

Health Care.—Usually health care
is the most neglected aspect in these
prostitutes’ lives. Often, they are infected with sexually transmitted diseases (STD). However, visiting a doctor is a problem for them for any
number of reasons. Firstly, knowing
the prostitutes’ real identities, the private doctors were at times very mean
and rude. In addition, the current
AIDS campaign has led a number of
the respondents to hide their identities,
and thus their real medical problems
were not revealed to the doctors. Secondly, the requirements of their business is such that the prostitutes can not
be away from their quarters for a long
time which is often needed if they try to
use any government hospital outdoor
services. Thirdly, treatment in itself

Brief Reports

 

Social Biology

becomes an expensive affair, and they
simply can not afford it.

Under the current program, the
prostitutes were persuaded to go to a
State General Hospital where they
were examined and treated, particularly for STD’s. Adequate treatment
could be achieved because the prostitutes were aware that the doctor at the
hospital knew their profession and
therefore could make all necessary relevant queries about potential health
problems. Furthermore, the doctor’s
sympathetic outlook gave the prostitutes faith in and respect for the treatment. All the prostitutes who were
treated admitted that for the first time
the right questions had been asked of
them and also the right treatment had
been prescribed.

Perception of the Future.—A large
majority (70 per cent) of the respondents said that they wanted to leave the

profession. In fact, many women had

planned to marry and settle down with
the man with whom they had been living for a number of years. But the grim
reality was that at the juncture of their
actually leaving the profession, the
man married someone else, leaving
them with the darkness of the same
life.

DISCUSSION

The prostitutes included in the study
had largely unsatisfactory lives. In between their initially “‘normal’’ lives and
the present, they passed through a disorganized, drifting state where they
were neither part of the normal organized society nor part of the prostitutes’ world.

 
Vol. 41, No. 3-4

The general assumption that poverty is the main cause of prostitution
for women is partially supported by the
current study. Our observations supports a finding that poverty in combination with other factors leads women
to become prostitutes.
In the cases of the never-married females, we found that prostitution was
i, deliberately” chosen as a way of life,
S because it suited the goals and interests
+ Of particular individuals under the cir‘= cumstances. We use the word ‘“‘delib8 erately’” because most of these girls
Q chose prostitution because they saw it
& as an easy and lazy way of life. However, in the course of the life process
© that led them to prostitution, most of
3 the women have become easy going
‘¢ and can no longer think of being engaged in the hard work that any other
.2 life would require, although they are
a certainly aware of the shame and grim° ness associated with prostitution.

It was repeated post-marital abuse
in the in-laws’ families experienced by

Dutta Gupta, Beta. 1964. Contemporary social problems in India. Vidyodaya Library,
Calcutta.

JOARDER, BISWANATH. 1984. Prostitution in historical and modern perspectives. InterIndian Publications. New Delhi.

Downloaded by [University

Brief Reports

259

some married females that weakened
the ties holding them into a normatively ascribed pattern of social behavior. However, in the largest number of
cases (17 of 33), it was the refusal by
in-laws or inability by parental family
to provide help and support at the time
of a husband and provider’s death that
rendered the women vulnerable to exploitation and eventually led them to
accept prostitution as a source of livelihood.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors express their heartful gratitude to Dr. Niranjan Bhattacharyya,
Bagha Jatin State General Hospital for caring for the prostitutes, treating them for
their diseases, and guiding them to build
confidence and to become aware of their
health status. The authors also acknowledge the help of Ms. T. Vanitha for helping
in interviewing and Sipra Chakraborty for
preparing the manuscript. The Apex club
of Domjur is also thankfully acknowledged.

REFERENCES

Punexar, S. D., and Kamata Rao. 1962. Study
of prostitutes in Bombay. Allied Publication,
Bombay.

 

 

 
