Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Introduction: Genetics in epidemiology

Gordon Allen Organizing Chairmen & Bernice H. Cohen Organizing Chairmen

To cite this article: Gordon Allen Organizing Chairmen & Bernice H. Cohen Organizing
Chairmen (1979) Introduction: Genetics in epidemiology, Social Biology, 26:2, 93-93, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1979.9988367

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1979.9988367

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

e
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lil Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Introduction: Genetics in Epidemiology

 

Gordon Allen and Bernice H. Cohen, Organizing Chairmen

Division of Biometry and Epidemiology, National Institute of Mental Health, Rockville,
Maryland; and Department of Epidemiology, School of Hygiene and Public Health, The Johns

Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland

The symposium “Genetics in Epidemiology” was sponsored by the AAAS
Sections on Biological and Medical
Sciences, by the Society for the Study of
Social Biology, and by the American
Public Health Association at the Annual
Meeting of the American Association for
the Advancement of Science in Houston,
Texas, on January 4, 1979. The series of
papers following this Introduction are
based in large measure on the presentations at the meeting. In addition, there
were others by Drs. Arno G. Motulsky
(School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle) and Rune Cederlof (Karolinska Institute, Stockholm) for which no
written manuscripts are available.

Medical science has been very successful in explaining and controlling infectious
and nutritional diseases. Consequently,
disorders that are determined partly or
wholly by heredity are now assuming
greater relative importance. Much has
been learned about the frequency and distribution of genes that cause rare heriditary diseases. Through combined epidemiologic, clinical, and _ genetic
approaches, single genes are also being
identified as important variables in susceptibility to the more common chronic
diseases. Research in this direction may
still have much to offer. Undoubtedly,
however, the chronic diseases are more
often multifactorial. That is, they result

from a combination of genetic factors of
small individual effect and environmental
agents that often interact with each other
and are therefore difficult to identify individually.

Collaboration between diverse disciplines may be difficult even when those
disciplines are interested in the same phenomenon. It 1s almost impossible when
they choose to focus on different phenomena. In that case a bridge must be built,
and this process is likely to be laborious
but richly rewarding. The problem is illustrated in this symposium by schizophrenia. Some social scientists see not a disease, but a collection of deviant social
behaviors, variously ascertained and possibly having peculiar distributions among
social classes. Geneticists, in contrast, try
to classify individuals more specifically
and to study biological traits that may
have recognizable distributions within
families. Each group is making some attempts to construct the bridge across the
chasm, but the conjoint effort remains a
challenge.

The symposium illustrated both the
successes and the impasses, the excitement and the frustration, of research in
epidemiological genetics. This research
domain is relatively new and should
present career openings to recruits trained
in medical, biological, or behavioral
science.

93

 
