Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Frederick osborn: Frederick osborn, demography's
statesman, on his eightieth spring: March, 1969

Frank Notestein

To cite this article: Frank Notestein (1999) Frederick osborn: Frederick osborn, demography's
statesman, on his eightieth spring: March, 1969, Social Biology, 46:3-4, 179-183, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1999.9988997

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1999.9988997

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 6

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:48

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Frederick Osborn

Frederick Osborn, Demography’s Statesman,

on his Eightieth Spring: March, 1969

Frank Notestein

 

A tribute to Frederick Osborn at the 34th Annual Meeting of the Population Association of America

held in Atlantic City, NJ, April 10-12, 1969.

Frank Notestein, Office of Population Research, Princeton University, was a co-founder with Osborn
of PAA in 1930. Notestein was PAA President in 1947; Osborn, in 1949.

Mr. President, I was greatly honored
when you asked me to present your special guest to the Association in celebration of his eightieth birthday. There is no
man to whom the Association owes more
for its early tone as a scientific society
than to Frederick Osborn. There is no one
who has contributed more as demographer and eugenist to the scientific development of the borders between the social
and biological sciences. There is no one
who has done as much to bring major resources to the scientific study of population. It gives me special personal pleasure
to present him because there is no one to
whom I am more indebted as mentor and
friend.

Now, lest the mention of an eightieth
birthday bring up an aged image, you
should be warned. Eighty seems to be
only the onset of maturity for demographers, whose dean, Walter Wilcox,
grudgingly agreed to departure at the age
of 103. Alas, owing to a juvenile streak,
Frederick Osborn may be too reckless to
last that long. Since his seventy-fifth year
he has broken I don’t know how many
ribs skiing, his back driving a strange
miniature car, and, the winter before last,
his leg and hip playing ice hockey with
some of his grandchildren. It is not for
nothing that the gods launched this
perennial youth on the first day of spring
eighty years ago. One is reluctant to be
critical of the gods but it does seem as if

17

they might have sent along a little more
padding for the long bones of this inveterate youngster.'

This is not the time for an assessment
of Osborn’s intellectual contributions to
our field. Most of us are aware of the
solid merits of Schwesinger and Osborn
on Heredity and Environment, and of
Lorimer and Osborn’s critically important
work, Dynamics of Population. Most of
us realize that his two editions of Preface
to Eugenics, his new book, The Future of
Human Heredity, and his work in support
of the Eugenics Society have done much
to improve the discourse between biologists and social scientists in this area and
to substitute sanity for the exhortations of
the lunatic fringe.

One of the truly best sellers in our
field is his thoughtful essay published
first as “Population: An International Dilemma,” and re-issued in paperback with
articles by Malthus and Sir Julian Huxley.
Although he derives no personal profit
from the sales of this book, I must say
that in choosing his joint authors he exhibited the kind of acumen that permitted
him to retire from business before age 40.

But these are matters of the scholarly
record. I would rather deal this evening
with more personal matters that have not

‘Osborn was a slender man, standing 6 feet 8 inches
in height. Born March 21, 1889, he died at the age of
91 on January 7, 1981. His family home was in Garrison, NY.

9
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

180

been adequately documented. Probably
many of you know that Frederick Osborn
was a charter member of this Association.
There are few of us left, but don’t let that
discourage you. There were rather few of
us to start with. At least Warren Thompson, Frederick Osborn, Frank Lorimer,
Frank Hankins, and Frank Notestein survive. Could this suggest the not unpleasant hypothesis that an additional aid to
survival among demographers is to have
“F” for a first initial?

You may recall that it was Mrs. Sanger
who stimulated Henry Pratt Fairchild to
call the initial organizing meeting of the
Association and who found the money to
meet the costs. It was, indeed, the plan
that she would be elected vice-president
at that meeting. But Frederick Osborn, a
profound admirer of Mrs. Sanger, persuaded both her and the organizing membership that the scientific standing of the
new Association would be fostered if her
name were withdrawn. Osborn, in many
respects the unabashed reformer, always
jealously guarded the scientific role of
this Association.

Osborn’s career must indeed be
unique. Businessman, public trustee,
general officer of the Army, United States
diplomat, outstanding demographer and
eugenist, and promoter par excellence of
the “hard” social sciences. It is an impressive and improbable combination.

In 1910, he graduated Phi Beta Kappa
as an English Major from Princeton, in an
era when, I fear, any studying was inconspicuously if not furtively done. There
followed a year at Cambridge. ...

From 1912 to 1919, with interruption
for service in the Red Cross in Europe
during the War, our guest took up railroading, serving as Treasurer, Vicepresident in charge of traffic, and President of the Detroit, Toledo and Irontown

Frederick Osborn

 

 

Social Biology

Railroad. It was an enterprise that had
such a propensity for losing money that it
was not so much a railroad as a white elephant. But the white elephant turned to
gold, when Fred sold it to Henry Ford by
pointing out to him that the road’s rightof-way adjoined Ford’s plant and that the
line crossed every east-west trunk line in
the country with obvious advantages to
the allocation of joint rates.

Shortly thereafter he returned to New
York to join one of the financial houses?
on Wall Street as a special partner. There
his major enterprise was a brilliant maneuver by which he led a group that
managed to pool the patents for the catalytic cracking of oil. He believes that
this activity reduced the price of gasoline
by a few cents for several years with the
additional advantage that he and his colleagues were handsomely rewarded for
their efforts. In any case, shortly before
age forty’ he decided to retire from business.

Then began the improbable part of the
story. Mr. Osborn went to the anthropologist, Clark Wissler, at the Museum of
Natural History, and asked Dr. Wissler to
lay out a course of reading that would
take him about two years working at an
old rolltop desk in a corner of the museum.* I suppose the story is apocryphal
that at the end of two years, Fred set an
examination for himself, took it, and
passed himself. In any case, as a Princeton faculty man, I am sorry to have to
agree that he gave himself a much more
stimulating educational experience than

7G. M. P. Murphy & Co.

In 1929.

‘Circa 1929-1931. Osborn was later elected a
Trustee of the Museum of Natural History, serving
from 1932-1946. Thereafter he served as a Research
Associate in the Museum’s Department of Anthropology, where he worked in collaboration with Frank
Lorimer and Harry Shapiro for a number of years.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 3-4

anything that engaged his attention at the
university.

Having started his studies as a recently
retired business man somewhat in the
intellectual glow surrounding his distinguished uncle, Henry Fairfield Osborn,
the Aryan enthusiast for immigration
quotas by national origin, he came out of
his studies and subsequent collaboration
with Schwesinger and Lorimer with an
almost diametrically opposite position.
Racial and class differences in innate
capacity may or may not exist, he held,
but even if they do they are unimportant
compared to the differences in individual
capacity. The task for the eugenist is to
find how society can, by democratic
processes, become self-selective for the
traits it values. The preface to eugenics,
he held, is social and biological research
that discovers how individual traits are
transmitted, and the creation of a floor of
basic welfare without which it is impossible to recognize and develop the inborn
biological potential.

Before the fact, what odds would you
have given that a business man who retired before age 40 to devote himself to
eugenics in the spirit of his distinguished
and very conservative uncle would emerge
from his studies at the opposite end of
the spectrum, a strong advocate of social
amelioration? Clearly, the generation gap
is not new.

He came out, too, with close ties of
affection for his collaborator, Frank
Lorimer. ... A more improbable pair of
revolters from the older generation and
from each other never worked together
with more affection, frustration, and accomplishment.

It was sometime in the early thirties
that Fred made a fascinating statement to
me. He said, in effect, that having come
to the social sciences late and without a

Frederick Osborn 181

full, formal, academic training, he
doubted that he would ever become a
competent technician. On the other hand,
he had studied and worked enough, he
thought, to have gained a considerable
perspective and a measure of judgment.
Moreover, in business he had been successful as a promoter of new technology,
and he felt that the social sciences very
badly needed a promoter. He was going,
he said, to devote the remainder of his
life to stimulating and trying to find the
funds for the scientific study of man and
society.

I think it’s possible that the Office of
Population Research at Princeton was his
first promotional project. In any case, he
persuaded Mr. Milbank, whom he had
known on the Street and as a Princetonian, to have the Milbank Fund, for which
I then worked, give Princeton University
the funds to set up the Office of Population Research. Soon Osborn moved to
Washington as Adviser to the Bureau of
the Budget. I remember his saying that
one of his personal projects in building
the preface to eugenics would be to see
if he could establish free school lunches
throughout the nation because without
adequate nutrition, inborn ability could
not be recognized. The war quickly
blocked this activity.

Directly, as Chairman of the President’s Advisory Committee on Selective
Service, he was helping to strengthen the
psychological and psychiatric screening
for the Services. Soon General Marshall
had picked him to be the General in
charge of the morale division. In this
role, first as Brigadier and later as Major
General, he ran the biggest newspaper
business in the world, the biggest motion
picture business in the world, the biggest
correspondence school, and, I suspect,
the biggest nightclub business in the

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

182

world.’ He did many things in the area
of training and indoctrination, but what
he is particularly and rightfully proud of
is that he got the Army to take social
science seriously. Under the direction of
the late Professor Samuel Stouffer, a brilliant staff was assembled to utilize survey
techniques in the study of problems of
training and morale. A skeptical Army
staff learned that common sense was the
beginning and not the end of knowledge,
an adjunct to but no substitute for science. You all know the three-volume
work, The American Soldier, that reports
on this spectacularly successful enterprise
of our promoter.

The story goes on and on, but there is
no time. As a public trustee he served
many organizations ... but it was particularly as Trustee of the Milbank Memorial Fund, the Carnegie Corporation, and
Princeton University that he helped find
the money for collaborative projects between the Office of Population Research
and first, the League of Nations, and later
also the Department of State, which resulted in books by Irene Taeuber, Dudley
Kirk, Frank Lorimer, Louise Kiser,
Kingsley Davis, Wilbert Moore, Ansley
Coale, and myself. He then encouraged a
group led by Clyde Kiser and Pascal
Whelpton to undertake the Indianapolis

‘In 1940 President Roosevelt asked Osborn to direct the Civilian Committee on Selective Services in
connection with the Peace Time Draft established just
before the U.S. entry into World War II. His success in
this program led to his appointment in 1941 as head of
what became the Information and Education Division
of the Army. He ran programs for education, vocational
training, and recreation. His division published magazines and newspapers for the troops, including Stars
and Stripes and Yank, ran the Armed Forces Radio Service, made films, and supervised post exchanges and
USO clubs. After the war, General Osborn organized a
network of classes, university courses, and career training centers for soldiers overseas, with 2,000 such programs in Europe.

Frederick Osborn

Social Biology

Study. As a Trustee of the Social Science
Research Council and of Princeton University, he was a diligent and influential
supporter of what he likes to call the
“hard” social sciences.

For a time Osborn had to limit his interests because of preoccupation with his
assignment as Senator Austin’s deputy
at the United Nations where Fred represented our country in negotiations concerning atomic energy.°

He had scarcely wound up this assignment before he became deeply involved
with John D. Rockefeller I in launching
the Population Council, which he served
as President until 1959 and as Chairman
of the Executive Committee until 1968.
Here again, his restless energy as administrator, fund-raiser, author and general
agitator made its mark. He launched a
great many activities with a minimum of
funds. Believing, as he does, that investments in people are the most productive,
he launched a substantial fellowship program, helped the United Nations establish
demographic training centers abroad, and
supported a wide range of training and research activities in universities here and
overseas as well as helping to foster the
work of this Association, the International Population Union, and the American Eugenics Society. To top it off he has
just issued his new book, The Future of
Human Heredity, which is drawing enthu
‘As the deputy to the Chief United States Representative, he served on the United Nations Atomic Energy
Commission and the Commission for Conventional
Armaments. Until his resignation from the United Nations post in January 1950, Mr. Osborn often engaged
in heated exchanges with Andre Vishinsky and Andre
Gromyko, both Deputy Soviet Foreign Ministers at the
time. These full-time involvements kept Mr. Osborn
from turning his attention to the American Eugenics
Society until late 1949, even though he had been
elected President in 1946.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 3-4

siastic notices from distinguished scientists in both the social and the biological
fields.

Ladies and gentlemen, will you rise to
drink a toast: “Our gratitude and affectionate best wishes for the continuing youth
of our friend, past president, businessman,
soldier, author, scholar and promoter—

Frederick Osborn 183

demography’s statesman, Frederick Osborn.”

’Notestein’s tribute has not been published previously in the journal, unlike the other three biographical
articles. A typed copy of the speech, along with the information used here in the footnotes, comes from the
papers of Richard and Barbara Osborne, 1129 East
Eighth Street, Port Angeles, WA 98362. E-mail address:
rho6@columbia.edu.

 
