Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Race, ethnic group, and disease

Albert Damon

To cite this article: Albert Damon (1969) Race, ethnic group, and disease, Social Biology, 16:2,
69-80, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1969.9987804

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1969.9987804

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB arr | ei
Submit your article to this journal @
ail Article views: 16
N
Q View related articles 4

wa Citing articles: 5 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:53

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Race, Ethnic Group, and Disease

Albert Damon

Department of Anthropology
Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts

The associations between disease and
racial or ethnic group concern a variety of
scientists and administrators. The practicing physician can use such information in
the diagnosis and treatment of disease; the
public health official, in planning programs
which aim to detect, prevent, or eradicate
disease, as well as in allocating scarce and
costly health resources like doctors, nurses,
educators, clinics, and hospitals. The epidemiologist uses such data to help explain
the distribution and determinants of disease
frequency, thereby suggesting leads for the
laboratory scientist’s investigation of the
causes of disease. The demographer uses
knowledge of the racial distribution of
disease to help explain distinctive patterns
of population structure or of vital statistics.

Among basic scientists, the geneticist
deals with the mechanisms and mode of
transmission of hereditary disease within
populations and with the differing gene
frequencies among populations separated
in time, place, and origin. The anthropologist tries to account for such population
differences in terms of the origin, evolution,
distribution, and differing environments—
natural, biological, and cultural—of the
populations concerned. Disease is a major
selective factor in human evolution, and its
present distribution affords clues to the

 

69

 

 

past history and future course of mankind.

The difference between the approaches of
the basic and the applied human biologist
is that the former attempts to explain
human variation. He regards the manifestations of human diversity as the dependent variable—dependent on climate,
habitat, migration, inbreeding, and genetic
mechanisms. The applied scientist, on the
other hand, takes the manifestations of
human variability as given—that is, as the
independent variable—and tries to turn
these biological differences to practical ends,
such as finding, treating, and preventing
disease.

Before presenting the associations between race and disease, let us define some
terms. The science of the distribution and
determinants of disease in man is epidemiology, an applied biomedical discipline
which has recently expanded its scope from
infectious diseases (‘‘epidemics”) to the
chronic, noninfectious disorders of multiple or uncertain etiology which now account for most of the disability and deaths
in advanced societies. Examples are coronary heart disease, hypertension, cancer,
“strokes,” arthritis, peptic ulcer, and mental
illness,

As in other observational sciences, the
first step in epidemiologic method (Mac
 

 
 

 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

70 Damon

Mahon, Pugh, and Ipsen, 1960) is description. The prevalence of disease is
charted in respect to time, place, and person. The personal or “‘host’”’ characteristics
most relevant to disease frequency are age,
sex, and race. Of secondary importance, on
the whole, are other biological traits like
physical constitution, birth order and maternal age, and socioeconomic traits like
income, occupation, and marital status.
Sometimes, as for single-gene disorders like
hemophilia, genetic constitution is of prime
importance.

From his initial description the epidemiologist frames hypotheses to account for the
observed distributions. He then tests these
hypotheses by specifically designed quantitative, analytic studies, still observational
in method. If his hypothesis survives
analytic test, his final step is to clinch the
proof by experiment—as, for example, in
fluoridating water supplies to reduce caries
frequency.

It can be seen that clinical medicine,
pathology, physical anthropology, and demography all contribute to descriptive
epidemiology. Our concern here is with the
personal characteristic of race—a concept
of physical anthropology—in its association
with disease, as defined clinically and
pathologically. We shall summarize the
evidence briefly and then discuss possible
explanations. Fortunately the only strong
emotion aroused by this aspect of race is
humanitarian, to prevent or relieve suffering, so that we need not plead to justify
the research or debate the ethics of examining the evidence.

DEFINITION OF RACE AND
ETHNIC GROUP

For descriptive purposes, the epidemiologist analyzes disease rates among groups
of persons who are more homogeneous than
the general population, whether this relative homogeneity has been derived biologi
Social Biology

cally or culturally. The word “relative”
should be stressed, both because human
beings and human groups, like all living
things, are innately variable and because no
group is completely isolated from outside
influence. A biologically distinct group can be
termed a race or population. Such a group,
as a result of past breeding patterns, has
a “relatively” large percentage of genes in
common. The great preponderance of human genes are, of course, shared by all men.
A racial group may vary in number from a
few hundred to a few hundred million, and
in residential area, whether of origin or of
current residence, from local to geographic
to continental in size (Garn, 1965).

A racial group may, and in fact often
does, have distinguishing physical features
—like skin color, hair form, and facial conformation—as well as distinctive aggregates
of genes (“genotype”) and of traits (““phenotype’) determined by laboratory test but
not externally apparent. Examples of such
cryptic genetic traits are blood groups,
hemoglobin variants, blood cell and serum
enzymes, and ability to taste phenylthiocarbamide.

A culturally distinct group is an ethnic
group. Frequently the two kinds of homogeneity, biological and cultural, overlap or
coincide, as in the case of most primitive
tribes or of linguistic, religious, or colored
minorities in a city or country, provided
only that the members of the group share
a common ancestry. For many practical
purposes then, including epidemiologic description, it may not matter how a particular group under study became distinctive, nor the precise proportion of biology
and culture in its present distinctiveness.
The Boston Irish, Italian, Jewish, Armenian, and Negro communities, for example,
are distinctive both biologically and culturally; they are racial as well as ethnic
groupings.

Biological and cultural similarity can
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 16, No. 2

reinforce one another. On the one hand, distinctive physical features make it easy for
society to practice or enforce certain breeding patterns, as intermarriage or interbreeding between white persons and Negroes is now forbidden in South Africa.
On the other hand, distinctive cultural
practices like religion may isolate breeding
populations more or less completely, as in
the case of the Jews for many centuries,
or small contemporary groups like the
Amish, Dunkers, and Hutterites. Whatever
has caused or continues to maintain a group
in relative isolation, social or biological,
the net result is a group with more genes or
social practices, or both, in common than
the population at large.

It is important to distinguish between
biological and cultural homogeneity in
investigating the cause of disease or in
attempting prevention. In the case of
genetic diseases occurring mainly or exclusively among groups which may be both
racial and ethnic, it would be fruitless to
seek explanation in terms of current cultural
practices. Whatever the cultural or environmental factors at the origin of or contributing to the persistence of the hemoglobin S (sickle-cell) mutation among African Negroes or Tay-Sachs disease (infantile
amaurotic idiocy) among Jews, the current
bearers of these genes are defined biologically, not culturally. On the other hand,
one should not ascribe differences in disease frequency to racial or biological homogeneity unless cultural and environmental
factors can be ruled out. For all human
diseases, both heredity and environment are
involved, the relative proportions varying
from one disease, population, and person to
another.

RACE AND DISEASE

For a genera! picture let us first examine
racial differences in disease within a single

Race, Ethnic Group, and Disease 71

country, the United States. Here, medical
diagnosis and population coverage, though
by no means perfect, are more uniform for
the various racial and ethnic subgroups
than would be the case in international comparisons. There are three major indices of
health or disease status for a population or
group: mortality as reflected by death certification, examination of a representative
sample, and morbidity (illness) as measured
by household or hospital surveys. We shall
consider only the first two, since hospital
records and household interviews correspond poorly with the true medical status
of a population.

Mortality in the United States. In the 1960
census, Whites made up 88.6% of the
population of 179,326,000, and Nonwhites
11.4%. The Nonwhites were 92% Negro,
2.6% American Indian, 2.3% Japanese,
1.2% Chinese, 0.9% Filipino, and 1.1% all
others. Needless to say, the ‘‘Whites” were
also ethnically and biologically diverse, as
will be discussed below. Mortality rates for
Whites and Nonwhites in 1900 and 1965
appear in Table 1. In both years the Nonwhite death rates exceeded those for Whites.
Despite the great reduction in death rates
since 1900, 60% among Whites and 63%
among Nonwhites, the relative proportions
(adjusted for age) have moved only slightly
toward equality. A further breakdown by
age, omitted here, shows 1965 mortality
rates for Nonwhites higher at all ages except 75 and over.

More informative is the comparison of
death rates by cause, set out in Table 2.
On the whole, the White rates exceeded
Nonwhite rates in the chronic, noninfectious, and “degenerative” diseases, with
the major exceptions of diabetes, hypertension, and “strokes” (vascular lesions of the
central nervous system), which are associated with hypertension. The Nonwhites,
 

72 Damon

on the other hand, had higher death rates
for infectious diseases and genital cancer.
With the sole exception of genital cancer,
White cancer rates were higher. Among subcategories of cancer not shown in Table 2,
White death rates were four to five times
higher than Nonwhite rates for testicular
and skin cancer, roughly equal for prostatic

 

Social Biology

67% as high as Nonwhite rates for cervical
and penile cancer, respectively.

National Health Examination Survey.
Data from this Survey, conducted between
1962 and 1964 on 6,672 adults aged 18 to
79 years and representing the civilian, noninstitutionalized population of the United
States, can tell only about common morbid

and endometrial cancer, but only 50% and conditions. One would hardly expect such a

TABLE 1

DEATH RATES FOR WHITES AND NONWHITES
IN THE UNITED STATES, 1900 AND 1965

(Annual rates per 1,000 population in specified group)

RATE IN WHITES AS
PERCENTAGE OF
RATE IN NONWHITES

MortTaLity RATES
White Nonwhite

YEAR Unadjusted Adjusted* Unadjusted Adjusted* Unadjusted Adjusted*

1900....... 17.0 17.6 25.0 27.8 68 63
1965....... 9.4 7.1 9.6 10.3 98 69

* Adjusted to the age distribution of the total U.S. population in 1940, to take account of age differences and changes in the White and Nonwhite populations.

TABLE 2

DEATH RATES FROM SELECTED CAUSES FOR WHITES
AND NONWHITES IN THE UNITED STATES, 1965

(Per 100,000 population in specified group)

RATE IN WHITES AS
PERCENTAGE OF

MortTALIty RATES

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

CAUSE White Nonwhite RATE IN NoNWHITES

Suicide... 0.0... 0.0... cee eee eee 11.9 5.0 238
Leukemia........... 0.0.00 ee eee 7.4 4.1 180
Arteriosclerotic heart disease. .... 303.8 175.8 173
Urinary CaCO? a. ous ce cawxi cava 7.5 4.6 163
Lymphosarcoma................ 8.1 5.1 159
Breast Cancer.........00 ee een eee 14.6 9.5 154
Peptic ulcer.............0. 000s 5.6 3.8 147
Respiratory cancer.............. 27.7 20.6 134
Digestive cancer................ 49.6 41.8 119
Motor vehicle accidents.......... 25.3 25.8 98
Vascular lesions of the central

nervous system.............-. 102.3 114.7 89
Genital cancer.................. 20.5 23.3 88
Cirrhosis of liver................ 12.5 14.6 86
Diabetes mellitus..............5 16.7 20.1 83
Accidents, other than motor

vehicle... 2... 0.0.2 cece eee 28.9 41.2 70
Pneumonia................00055 28.9 44.2 65
Hypertensive heart disease....... 24.7 55.3 45
Tuberculosis................00% 3.4 9.3 37
Syphilis..........00 000.00 cee ee 1.0 2.8 36
Homicide.................00005 3.0 24.6 12

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Vol. 16, No. 2

small sample to contain many persons with
cancer, for example. For the same reason—
small numbers in the total sample—the
Nonwhites were virtually all Negroes.

The major findings relevant to race and
disease are these. White and Negro rates
were similar for coronary heart disease,
rheumatoid arthritis, and osteoarthritis.
Negro rates were significantly higher for
hypertension; for hypertensive heart disease, both absolutely and as a percentage of
those with hypertension; and for syphilis, as
indicated by positive serological test. Negroes had superior hearing and (uncorrected) visual acuity, for both near and
distant vision. Negroes had higher mean
blood pressure levels, both systolic and
diastolic, than Whites. Negro men had
higher blood glucose and lower cholesterol
levels than White men. Negroes of both
sexes had only two-thirds as many decayed,
missing, and filled teeth as Whites, even
among persons of the same income or education. On the other hand, Negroes had one
and a half times the periodontal (gum)
disease of Whites.

Special surveys, Data for other Nonwhites
in the United States are sparse, being
confined, among American Indians as a
whole, to infectious diseases and accidents,
both of which show higher than national
rates (Wagner and Rabeau, 1964), or to
surveys of specific conditions. For example,
osteoarthritis is relatively frequent among
Blackfoot and Pima Indians; diabetes,
among the Papago; and gallbladder disease,
trachoma, and congenitally dislocated hips
among Southwestern Indians in general. On
the other hand, Southwestern Indians have
relatively little duodenal ulcer (Sievers and
Marquis, 1962) despite a high percentage of
Indians (83% or more) with blood group
O, which is associated with duodenal ulcer
among Caucasians, Japanese, and Nigerians,

On Hawaii, persons of pure or predominantly Polynesian ancestry have strik
Race, Ethnic Group, and Disease 73

ingly high rates of diabetes (Sloan, 1963).
For coronary heart disease, their rates exceed those among Caucasians, Filipinos,
and Japanese living in Hawaii (Moellering
and Bassett, 1967). Rates were higher for
pure Hawaiians than for part Hawaiians.
Among men with coronary heart disease,
Hawaiians were three times as likely to die
from the acute episode as Japanese, and
pure Hawaiians were more likely to die
than part Hawaitans.

Chinese and Japanese in the United
States show some distinctive patterns, particularly in respect to cancer. Among both
groups, death rates for prostatic cancer and
breast cancer are much lower than for the
White population, and rates for digestive
cancer (esophagus, stomach, and _ liver)
much higher. The Japanese have unusually
high rates for esophageal and stomach
cancer as do the Chinese for nasopharyngeal
and liver cancer (Smith, 1956a, 6). In both
groups, chronic lymphatic leukemia is about
half as common as among the White population (Shimkin and Loveland, 1961).

The number of such comparisons could
be greatly extended, within other countries
having distinctive racial and ethnic groups,
such as South Africa and Israel, as well as in
the United States. Tables 3 and 4, the
former and part of the latter from McKusick
(1967), summarize the associations between race or ethnic group and disease for
simply-inherited disorders (Table 3) and for
disorders of complex genetics or in which
genetic factors are unproved (Table 4).
On the whole, the single-gene disorders are
extremely rare compared to those of multiple causation, which constitute the major
burden of disease in developed countries.
In Table 4 we have attempted to include
only confirmed associations, omitting curiosities and single reports, however intriguing (e.g., Kudo, 1968).

1 For references on individual conditions listed in
Table 3, see McKusick, 1966; for references on some

of the multifactorial disorders, Table 4, see Damon,
1962, and the sources cited in the present paper.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

74 Damon

DISCUSSION

What use can we make of the clear associations between racial or ethnic group
and disease presented so far? The practical
scientist can, as mentioned, apply them
immediately to the detection, diagnosis,
and treatment of disease. A given expenditure of resources will find, cure, and prevent more cervical cancer, syphilis, and
tuberculosis among Nonwhites in the United
States than among Whites, for example. In
clinical medicine, fever, abdominal pain,
and leucocytosis may have different implications in a Northern European (a
“surgical” condition like appendicitis or
cholecystitis), a Mediterranean (favism,
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, or familial Mediterranean fever),

Social Biology

and a Negro (possible sickling crisis). In
the two last cases, the patient may be
spared needless surgical exploration if the
physician is aware of the ethnic and racial
associations of disease.

Much more difficult 1s explaining the
associations. Toward this end we shail
follow the useful checklist of MacMahon
et al. (1960):

1. Errors of measurement.

2. Differences between groups with respect
to more directly associated demographic
variables.

3. Differences in environment.

4. Differences in bodily constitution.

5. Differences in genetic constitution.

Errors of measurement, the first item,
means that racial or ethnic distributions of
disease are liable to distortion due to in
TABLE 3

RACIAL AND ETHNIC DISEASE: SIMPLY
INHERITED DISORDERS*

Ethnic Group

Ashkenazic Jews

Relatively High Frequency

Abetalipoproteinemia

Relatively Low
Frequency

Phenylketonuria

Bloom’s disease

Dystonia musculorum deformans
Factor XI (PTA) deficiency
Familial dysautonomia
Gaucher’s disease

Niemann-Pick disease

Pentosuria

Spongy degeneration of brain

Stub thumbs

Tay-Sachs disease

Mediterranean peoples
(Greeks, Italians,
Sephardic Jews)

Africans

Hb S, Hb

persistent Hb F

Japanese (Koreans) Acatalasia

Familial Mediterranean fever
G-6-PD deficiency, Mediterranean

G-6-PD deficiency, African type
Hemoglobinopathies, esp.

Cystic fibrosis

type
Thalassemia (mainly 8)

Cystic fibrosis
Hemophilia
Phenylketonuria

, a and 8 thal,
Wilson’s disease

Dyschromatosis universalis

hereditaria
Oguchi’s disease
Chinese a thalassemia
G-6-PD deficiency, Chinese type
Armenians Familial Mediterranean fever

* Data from McKusick, 1967. For references on individual conditions, see McKusick, 1966.

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

- OO

TABLE 4

RACIAL AND ETHNIC DISEASE: MULTIFACTORIAL DISORDERS WITH A
COMPLEX OR UNPROVED GENETIC COMPONENT*

Ethnic Group

Ashkenazic Jews

Sephardic Jews
Northern Europeans

Trish
Chinese

Japanese

Filipinos (U.S. only)

Polynesians (Hawaiians)

Africans

American Indian

Icelanders

Eskimos

High Frequency

Buerger’s disease
Diabetes mellitus
Hypercholesterolemia
Hyperuricemia
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Leukemia
Pemphigus vulgaris
Polycythemia vera
Ulcerative colitis and
regional enteritis

Cystic disease of lung
Pernicious anemia

Major CNS malformations
(anencephaly, encephalocele)

Nasopharyngeal cancer
Trophoblastic disease

Cerbrovascular accidents
Cleft lip-palate

Gastric cancer
Trophoblastic disease

Hyperuricemia

Clubfoot
Coronary heart disease
Diabetes mellitus

Ainhum

Cervical cancer

Esophageal cancer
Hypertension

Polydactyly

Prehelical fissure

Sarcoidosis

Systemic lupus erythematosus
Tuberculosis

Uterine fibroids

Congenital dislocation of hip
Gallbladder disease
Rheumatoid arthritis
Tuberculosis

Glaucoma

Otitis, deafness
Salivary gland tumors

* Enlarged from Damon, 1962, and McKusick, 1967.

Low Frequency

Alcoholism
Cervical cancer
Pyloric stenosis
Tuberculosis

Chronic lymphatic leukemia
Prostatic cancer

Acne vulgaris

Breast cancer

Chronic lymphatic leukemia
Congenital hip disease
Otosclerosis

Prostatic cancer

Arteriosclerosis

Congenital hip disease

Gallstones

Major CNS malformations
(anencephaly, encephalocele)

Multiple sclerosis

Osteoporosis and fracture
of hip and spine

Otosclerosis

Pediculosis capitis

Polycythemia vera

Psoriasis

Pyloric stenosis

Skin cancer

Duodenal ulcer
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

76 Damon

adequate diagnosis, differential access to
and utilization of medical facilities, and
lack of precision in estimating populations
at risk. Transient residence and low utilization of medical facilities, even within the
same medical care plans, are more common
among Nonwhites than among Whites in
the United States. Jews, on the other hand,
make maximum use of medical facilities in
comparison with other White subgroups. As
for diagnosis, skin rashes or skin cancer
might be harder to diagnose among Nonwhites than among Whites. Not only have
such errors been considered before entering
the diseases in Tables 3 and 4, but the internal evidence of the tables—one or
another group higher for some diseases,
lower for others—shows that no such simple
explanation can account for the associations
observed.

Differences between groups with respect to
more directly associated variables. Some reported differences between groups may reflect differences in age, sex, or socioeconomic
status rather than differential disease susceptibility. When disease rates are compared
for Whites and Nonwhites of similar age,
sex, and socioeconomic status—in respect to
occupation, residence, education, income
and the like—and when the differences persist, they cannot be attributed to these
demographic variables. Such is the case for
many of the disorders in Tables 3 and 4.

Differences in environment. Apart from
the demographic variables associated with
socioeconomic status just mentioned, there
are many finer differences in customs and
way of life. Dietary habits, use of tobacco
and alcohol, amount of physical exertion,
age at first intercourse or at marriage,
number of children, contraceptive and
infant feeding practices differ from one
group to another and doubtless underlie
many ethnic differences in disease.

The relative contributions of heredity
and environment to such differences can be
assessed epidemiologically in two ways:

Social Biology

by studying disease rates among migrants—
that is, the same breeding group in different
environments—and among members of
different racial or ethnic groups in the
“same” environment. (The quotation marks
indicate that the micro-environment of an
ethnic group need not be identical to that of
its neighbor in the same geographic or
macro-environment.) For example, rates of
stomach cancer are higher for Japanese
living in the United States than for American Whites. But rates for Japanese living in
Hawaii exceed those for Japanese in the
mainland United States, while rates for
Japanese living in Japan are highest of all.
Among the Japanese living in Hawaii, rates
of stomach cancer are higher for those born
in Japan than for those born in Hawaii.
A similar situation holds for nasopharyngeal
cancer among Chinese in California. Thus,
the causal factors must be associated with
a way of life that changes with migration,
whether or not a minor genetic factor may
also be involved.

On the other hand, Negroes of West
African origin have higher blood pressure
and more hypertensive disease than Whites
in a variety of environments in the Caribbean, Panama, and the United States
(summarized by Phillips and Burch, 1960;
Florey and Cuadrado, 1968). This consistency in various environments argues for
heredity.

An example of the comparison of different breeding populations in the “same”
environment would be the Hawaiian studies
of coronary heart disease already cited
(Mollering and Bassett, 1967), showing
marked differences among men of pure
Hawaiian, part Hawaiian, and Japanese
descent. Unfortunately, one cannot be sure
how similar their living habits were.

Differences in body constitution. This
topic brings us closer to the biological associations of interest to the anthropologist
and geneticist. A few examples must suffice.
Melanin protects against sunlight, acDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 16, No. 2

counting for the much lower rates of skin
cancer among pigmented groups. The Negro
ectoderm responds to injury with excessive
connective tissue to form keloids, or raised
scars. Connective tissue from Caucasians,
Negroes, Eskimos, and American Indians is
reported to differ in amount and composition (Boucek et al., 1958).

The increased density of Negro bone
(Trotter, Broman, and Peterson, 1960) may
in part account for the relatively low frequency of spine and hip fractures among
elderly Negroes (Bollet et al., 1965; Moldawer et al., 1965). On the other hand,
despite the reduced bone density of Orientals, presumed to be genetic (Garn et al.,
1960), Wong (1965) reported lower rates of
forearm fractures among Chinese and
Malays in Singapore than among Swedes in
Sweden. Negroes have markedly lower frequencies of Legg-Perthes disease, an osteochondrosis of the femoral head affecting
mainly young males, than do Caucasians
(Goff, 1954). American Indians, who may
also have lower frequencies of Legg-Perthes
disease, are much more susceptible to
congenital dislocation of the hip than
Whites, whereas Negroes are markedly less
so. Anatomical differences in the shape of
the acetabulum have been adduced in explanation.

The nasal index, breadth/length, varies
with humidity and inversely with latitude
(Weiner, 1964). The long, narrow nose of
Eskimos is not wholly successful as an
adaptation to a cold, dry environment. This
may explain in part their frequent upper
respiratory infections, leading to draining
ears and deafness (Brody and McAlister,
1965), in contrast to Africans and Malayans.

The rarity of pediculosis capitis (head
lice) among Negroes is unexplained but
may relate to some characteristic of the
scalp or hair.

A physiological characteristic which varies among breeding populations is the level
of immunity against micro-organisms. Lack
Race, Ethnic Group, and Disease 17

ing previous exposure, some groups are extremely susceptible to diseases which are
mild in other populations. Fatal epidemics
of measles and upper respiratory infections
among Eskimos and Melanesians, smallpox among American Indians, and susceptibility to tuberculosis among all of
these groups as well as Negroes, have been
well documented. On the other hand,
Ashkenazic Jews are relatively resistant to
tuberculosis, presumably because they have
lived for centuries under crowded conditions where only the resistant survived.
Negroes appear relatively resistant to
vivax malaria, for similar selective reasons
(Bruce-Chwatt, 1967).

Research into the disease and immunological status of the few remaining isolates,
unexposed to the larger culture, can contribute greatly to our understanding of
disease as a selective factor in evolution,
the history and geography of disease, and
our knowledge of human origins and distribution (Hackett, 1963; Hudson, 1963,
1965; World Health Organization, 1968).

One way to demonstrate the reality ot
racial differences in physiological and biochemical functions, some of which underlie
differences in disease frequency and severity, is by alist, asin Table 5. Further research will undoubtedly disclose many more
racial differences than appear in this partial
list. Race is clearly more than skin deep.
In fact, the validity of the classical scheme
of human races, described morphologically
by early anthropologists and subsequently
confirmed on serological grounds, is independently substantiated by physiological
and pathological evidence. Some of the
three-way distributions, as for bone density,
twinning, and possibly blood pressure, are
particularly striking.

Differences in genetic constitution. Such
differences determine many of the bodily
characteristics just mentioned, such as skin
color or bone density. For only a few of the
single-gene disorders in Table 3 is there
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

 

78 Damon

evidence for heterozygote advantage, the
mechanism usually postulated for the persistence of such deleterious genes in numbers
beyond those expected from mutation—
that is, as “balanced polymorphisms.”
Hemoglobin S has been shown to confer
resistance to falciparum malaria in heterozygotes. The same is strongly suspected but
not yet fully established for other abnormal

Social Biology

long way to go in accounting for them all
and probably never can.

The genetic component is overwhelming
in the single-gene disorders. In the multicausal disorders, environmental factors tend
to dominate the genetic ones. There is little
doubt, for example, that alcoholism, tuberculosis, and cervical cancer are largely
environmental in origin. But even for tu
TABLE 5

SOME RACIAL DIFFERENCES IN PHYSIOLOGY
AND BIOCHEMISTY

TRAIT

Birth:
weight
skeletal maturation
dental maturation
neurological maturation
Neonatal motor development
Acuity, auditory and visual
Blood pressure
Bone density
Color blindness
Corneal arcus
Fibrinolysin activity
Isoniazid inactivation
Keloid formation
Lactase deficiency (adult)
Pulmonary function
Serum globulins
Skin resistance, electrical
Tasting, phenylthiocarbamide
Twinning, dizygotic

hemoglobins, for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, and for thalassemia.
Increased fertility, another aspect of heterozygote advantage besides resistance to
disease, has been reported for carriers of
cystic fibrosis (Knudson, Wayne, and
Hallett, 1967), and suggested, together with
improved survival, for heterozygote carriers
of Tay-Sachs disease (Myrianthopoulos and
Aronson, 1966).

But with almost 30% of human genetic
loci estimated to be polymorphic, and with
most of these probably “relics” of previous
selective crises (Bodmer, 1968), we have a

In RELATION TO
Caucasoip Norms

Mongoloids
Negroids (Orientals)
+
+
+
+
+
+- i,
+ —
+
+
+
+
+ +
+
4
+ +
+ —_

berculosis, an infectious disease most common in low-income, crowded communities,
several twin studies—the latest by Harvald
and Hauge (1965)—have shown a genetic
substrate, and the disease is much more
frequent and severe among Negroes than
among White persons, independent of childhood infection (Lurie, 1964). Incidentally,
it should be noted that diseases with a
genetic component need not be associated
with race—for example, peptic ulcer (Damon and Polednak, 1967).

Diseases which change in frequency or
manifestation over periods too short for

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

EE

Vol. 16, No. 2

genetic influences (mutation, selection, gene
flow, drift) to operate must be mainly environmental in origin. Examples relevant
here are the decline in mortality from hypertension and cervical cancer, and the oscillations in leukemia rates in the United
States during the last thirty to forty years.

In connection with the genetic influences
just noted, McKusick (1967) points out
that no racial or ethnic differences in mutation rates have been found and that gene
flow as well as mutation could account for
the occasional occurrence of (say) cystic
fibrosis in an American Negro.

A further difficulty in assessing the genetic component in the multifactorial diseases
in Table 4 is that the genetic component is
polygenic rather than monogenic, as in the
simply-inherited disorders of Table 3.
Variability in both the genetic and the environmental determinants of disease means
that one cannot expect associations to hold
or to be equally strong among all populations at all times or in the same population
at different times and in different places.
Research among racially mixed populations,
as well as among the isolates, the migrants,
and the different sedentary groups living in
the same environment already discussed
should help settle these questions.

SUMMARY

Differences in disease as well as in physiological and biochemical function have
been documented among the major classical
races of man, as well as among a variety of
breeding populations which are ethnically
or culturally as well as biologically distinct.

Race, Ethnic Group, and Disease 79

The diseases and the functional characteristics of racial or ethnic groups are both monogenic and polygenic; polygenic diseases
often have a strong environmental component as well.

Some of the most striking associations are
the virtually exclusive concentration of
certain single-gene disorders in one or
another group, such as pentosuria, dysautonomia, and the lipoidoses among Jews,
thalassemia and familial Mediterranean
fever among Mediterranean peoples, and
sickle-cell and some other hemoglobinopathies among Africans. Of the multifactorial diseases of complex or uncertain inheritance, there is a relatively high frequency of diabetes, leukemia, polycythemia
vera, and ulcerative colitis among Jews,
hypertension, polydactyly, and sarcoidosis
among Negroes, and diabetes and coronary
heart disease among Polynesians (Hawaiians). Twinning frequency, bone density,
lactase deficiency, and auditory and visual
acuity also differ among the major races of
man.

Distinctive racial or ethnic patterns of
disease can be profitably applied by the
public health official to the detection and
prevention of disease and by the clinician
in diagnosis and treatment. The anthropologist can gain insight into human origins,
relationships, distribution, and adaptation.
The geneticist has new material for the
study of heredity in human populations.
And finally the epidemiologist gains clues
to the cause of some of man’s major diseases,
with the ultimate hope of eradication.

REFERENCES

Bopmer, W. F. 1968. Demographic approaches to
the measurement of differential selection in human populations. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 59:690699,

Bottet, A. J., G. Encu, and W. Parson. 1965.
Epidemiology of osteoporasis. Arch. Int. Med.
116 :191-194,

Boucek, R. J., N. L. Nosrte, K. T. Kao, and
H. R. ELpeN. 1958. The effects of age, sex, and

race upon the acetic acid fractions of collagen
(human biopsy-connective tissue). J. Gerontol.
1322-9.

Bropy, J. A., and R. McALisTER. 1965. Draining
ears and deafness among Alaskan Eskimos. Arch.
Otolaryngol. 81:29-33.

Bruce-Cuwatt, L. J. 1967. Malaria. In P. B.
Beeson and W. McDermott (eds.) Textbook of
medicine. Saunders, Philadelphia.
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

80 Damon

Damon, A. 1962. Some host factors in disease:
Sex, race, ethnic group, and body form. J. Nat.
Med. Ass. 54:424-431.

Damon, A., and A. P. Potepnax. 1967. Constitution, genetics, and body form in peptic ulcer:
A review. J. Chronic Dis. 20:787-802.

FLorey, C. Du V., and R. R. Cuapranpo. 1968.
Blood pressure in native Cape Verdeans and in
Cape Verdean immigrants and their descendants
living in New England. Hum. Biol. 40:189-211.

Garn, S. M. 1965. Human races. 2d ed. Thomas,
Springfield, Illinois.

Garn, S. M., E. M. Pao, and M. E. Rit. 1964.
Compact bone in Chinese and Japanese. Science
143 : 1439-1440.

Hackett, C. J. 1963. On the origin of the human
{reponematoses. Bull. World Health. Org. 29:

—41.

HARVALD, B., and H. M. Hauce. 1965. Hereditary
factors elucidated by twin studies. In J. V.
Neel et al. (eds.), Genetics and the epidemiology
of chronic diseases. U.S. Public Health Service,
Publication No. 1163. Government Printing
Office, Washington, D.C.

Hupson, E. H. 1963, Treponematosis and anthropology. Ann. Int. Med. 58:1037-1048.

. 1965. Treponematosis and man’s social evolution. Amer. Anthrop. 67:885-901.

Knoupson, A. G., L. WAYNE, and W. Y. HAttett.
1967. On the selective advantage of cystic fibrosis heterozygotes. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 19:
388-392.

Kuno, T. 1968. Spontaneous occlusion of the circle
of Willis. A disease apparently confined to Japanese. Neurology 18 :485-496.

Lurig, M. B. 1964. Resistance to tuberculosis.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
MckKusicx, V. A. 1966. Mendelian inheritance in
man. Catalogue of autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-linked phenotypes. Johns

Hopkins Press, Baltimore.

. 1967. The ethnic distribution of disease in
the United States. J. Chronic Dis. 20:115-118.

MacManon, B., T. F. Pucu, and J. Issen. 1960.
Epidemiologic methods. Little, Brown, Boston.

MOELLERING, R. C., and D. R. Bassetr. 1967.
Myocardial infarction in Hawaiian and Japanese

 

 

Social Biology

males on Oahu—a review of 505 cases occurring
between 1955 and 1964. J. Chronic Dis. 20:89
Mo pawer, M., S. J. Zrstwerman, and L. C. CorLins. 1965. Incidence of osteoporosis in elderly
whites and elderly Negroes. J. Amer. Med. Ass.,
194:85-862.

MyRIANTHOPOULOS, N. C., and S. M. Aronson.
1966. Population dynamics of Tay-Sachs disease,
I. Reproductive fitness and selection. Amer. J.
Hum. Genet. 18:313-327.

Puituirs, J. H., and G. E. Burcu. 1960. A review
of cardiovascular diseases in the white and Negro races. Medicine 39:241-288.

SHIMKIN, M. B., and D. B. LovEtanp. 1961. A note
on mortality from lymphatic luekemia in Oriental populations in the United States. Blood 17:
763-766.

SrEvERS, M. L., and J. R. Marquis. 1962. Duodenal
ulcer among Southwestern American Indians.
Gastroenterology 42:566-569.

SLOAN, N. R. 1963. Ethnic distribution of diabetes
mellitus in Hawaii. J. Amer. Med. Ass. 183:
419-424.

SmitH, R. L. 1956a. Recorded and expected mortality among the Japanese of the United States
and Hawaii, with special reference to cancer.
J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 17:459-473.

. 19565. Recorded and expected mortality
among the Chinese of Hawaii and the United
States, with special reference to cancer. J. Nat.
Cancer Inst. 17:667-676.

Trotter, M., G. E. BRoMAN, and R. R. PETERSON.
1960. Densities of bones of white and Negro
skeletons. J. Bone Jt. Surg. 42-A:50-58.

WAGNER, C. J., and E. S. Rapeav, 1964. Indian
poverty and Indian health. Health, Education,
and Welfare Indicators, March, p. 24-44.

WEINER, J. S. 1964. Climatic adaptation. In G. A.
Harrison, J. S. Weiner, J. M. Tanner, and N. A.
Barnicot, Human biology. Oxford Univ. Press,
New York.

Wone, P. C. N. 1965. Epidemiology of fractures of
the forearm among the major racial groups in
Singapore. Acta Orthop. Scand. 36:168~-178.

WoRrLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 1968. Research on
human population genetics. Tech. Rept. 387.
Geneva, Switzerland.

 
