Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Phases in coping: The hypothesis and its
implications

Arthur Falek & Sharon Britton

To cite this article: Arthur Falek & Sharon Britton (1974) Phases in coping: The hypothesis and
its implications, Social Biology, 21:1, 1-7, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1974.9988084

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1974.9988084

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Fone | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 15
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 46 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Phases in Coping: The Hypothesis and

Its Implications

Arthur Falek and Sharon Britton

 

 

Human and Behavioral Genetics Research Laboratory, Georgia Mental Health Institute, Atlanta, Georgia, and Departments of Psychiatry and Anatomy, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia

Huntington’s disease is a dominantly inherited neurological disorder with a mean
age of onset in the early 40’s and progressive deterioration leading to death approximately 10 to 20 years following onset. The
disease is inherited as an autosomal dominant with complete penetrance, so that each
child of an affected parent has a 50 per cent
chance of inheriting the illness. Since there
is no definitive method at present for the
early detection or control of this disorder,
all children of an affected parent are at
risk. When such at-risk individuals observe
the onset of the illness in near relatives,
many display characteristic anxieties concerning their own potential for developing
the disease.

Close work with families of patients with
Huntington’s disease in our laboratory, as
well as the report by Pearson (1972), indicates that affected individuals display a
complex pattern of coping similar to that
observed in terminally ill cancer patients
(Kubler-Ross, 1969). The similarity of
these patterns of coping first led us to believe that the behavior displayed by persons
affected with Huntington’s disease was an
attenuated form of the coping pattern
observed in persons aware of their own
imminent death.

Perusal of the literature reporting reactions to many forms of stress revealed
that in addition to that evoked by imminent self-death, a consistent pattern of
coping is exhibited by individuals in response to many stress-producing situations
(Aldrich, 1963; Averill, 1968; Bard, 1952;
Bozeman et al., 1955; Brewster, 1952;
Chodoff et al., 1964; Fisher, 1960; Fried,
1963; Hamburg and Hamburg, 1953; Janis,
1958; Kennell et al., 1970; Kubler-Ross,
1969; Lifton, 1954; Lindemann, 1944;
Parkes, 1965a, 6b; Solnit and Stach, 1961;
Sutherland, 1952; Visotsky et al., 1961;
Wiener, 1970; Wolfenstein, 1957; Wretmark, 1959). It is our purpose in this paper
to describe this commonly observed pattern
of coping responses and to propose a hypothesis based on the maintenance of a
psychological steady state to explain its
occurrence.

It must be recognized at the outset that
an individual’s reaction to a stress-producing situation will depend upon a constellation of interrelated variables including:
age; sex; initial psychological stability;
education; social and economic level; type,
degree, and duration of the stress; simultaneously occurring stress situations; prior
experience in coping with stress; and avail
 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

2 Falek and Britton

ability of resources for dealing with the
stress. Thus, a good deal of diversity is
found in the literature describing responses
to stress due to innumerable environmental
and biological variables.

However, in the midst of this diversity,
four clearly identifiable response patterns
to stressful situations emerge. The four responses most commonly observed in studies
of individuals under stress are: (1) shock
and denial, (2) anxiety, (3) anger and/or
guilt, and (4) depression. Studies surveyed
which report these responses are summarized in Table 1. As can be seen in the
table, the basic emotional reactions of
denial, anxiety, anger and/or guilt, and
depression occur in situations of self-dying,
the death or loss of a loved one, severe
physical injury or illness, and environmental stress. These basic response patterns
seem not to be particular to the trauma,

 

Social Biology

but appear to be general adaptation reactions to any situation of severe stress.

In addition, the individual experiencing
the stress is often observed to experience
all four responses and in the order given
(Bard, 1952; Bozeman et al., 1955; Cogswell, 1967; Kennell et al., 1970; Lifton,
1954; Parkes, 1965a), to repeat the progression in cyclic fashion with diminishing
intensity upon each repetition, or to fluctuate between two or more responses
(Cogswell, 1967; Kennell et al., 1970;
Kubler-Ross, 1969; Parkes, 1965a). How
does one explain these strikingly consistent
observations?

We propose that this sequence of coping responses so often described in the
literature is the phenotypic expression of
psychological mechanisms attempting to
reestablish the dynamic steady state. Descriptions of psychological mechanisms of

TABLE 1

ReEAcTIONS Common TO VARIOUS STRESS-PRODUCING SITUATIONS

Type or STRESS

ComrmMoNLy OxssERVED REACTIONS

Denial Anxiety Anger Depression Grief*

Self-dying
Dynamics of grief as applied to the dying; Schilder, 1951... ... eee eee eee xX
Dynamics of grief as applied to the dying; Aldrich, 1963 .. X wee xX xX
Terminal cancer patients; Kubler-Ross, 1969 ............. x XT x x
Bereavement
Loss of loved ones in fire; Lindeman, 1944 .............. one TT ea4 sn8 x
Separation from therapist; Brewster, 1952 ............-. aus eae wee eT x
Loss of child with leukemia; Bozeman et al., 1955 ........ x x xX x rr
Birth of defective child; Solnit and Stach, 1961 .......... re eT cig ims x
Bereavement in psychiatric patients; Parkes, 1965¢,b ...... x xX xX xX a
Death of newborn infant; Kennel] et al., 1970 ........... x x x x woe
Loss of child with fatal illness; Wiener, 1970 ............ x x xX x x
Physical trauma
Radical mastectomy; Bard, 1952 ....... cece cece eee e eee x x x xX wee
Extensive cancer surgery; Sutherland, 1952 .............. x wee X x a
Severe burn; Hamburg and Hamburg, 1953 .............. x x x x ane
Loss of hand; Fisher, 1960 ..........cececcceccereccneee x eee ue x x
Severe poliomyelitis; Visotsky et al. 1961 ............... x x xX x wee
Rehabilitation with paraplegia; Cogswell, 1967 .......... x vee xX x
Environmental trauma
War-time imprisonment; Lifton, 1954 .............0ee00. x xX x
Natural disasters (tornado); Wolfenstein, 1957 .......... x xX x x
Loss of homes Fried, 1963 cceswcewevercrexenaneanevwns vee vee x

een i rem
*The “grief response” is a commonly observed mourning reaction described by Lindeman, 1944, and Parkes, 1965a,

which incorporates denial, anxiety, anger, and depression.
+ Observed, but not reported as a separate stage.
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No. 1

adjustment and coping in terms of homeostatic or steady state mechanisms are now
common in the literature (Engel, 1953,
1960, 1962; Grinker, 1967; Menninger,
1954). The studies surveyed portray the
behavioral expression of such mechanisms
in real-life situations.

In order to function adequately, an
individual must maintain a carefully
balanced psychological and physiological
system. Any disturbance in either of these
systems creates a disturbance in the other
and results in stress in the total organism.
In this paper, we are only concerned with
disruption to an individual’s psychological
system. An _ individual’s psychological
system consists of such factors as his
self-concept, body image, social relations,
occupational status, economic level, material belongings, physical environment,
and so on. Disruption of any one of these
factors disturbs the psychological equilibrium that has been established, and triggers
mechanisms designed to reestablish the
steady state.

However, before any behavioral adjustment can take place, the new information
from the environment must be received
and incorporated on both a cognitive and
an emotional level. The individual must
cognitively recognize that there is a disequilibrium which requires behavioral
change. He must then emotionally experience himself as somehow different as a
result of the change in his equilibrium.
The four-part coping sequence described
above is the behavioral expression of the
ongoing process of cognitive and emotional
incorporation of the trauma leading to
readjustment.

Consider now the person experiencing
the stress. In order to avoid any sudden
and severe disruption of the psychological
equilibrium which may destroy or incapacitate the system, the most immediate recourse is for the individual to maintain

Phases in Coping 3

the status quo by denial. The first response
of the coping mechanism is shock and disbelief. Psychological mechanisms attempt
to maintain the integrity of the personality
by simply denying the stressful situation.
Since the individual does not acknowledge
the stress at either the cognitive or emotional level, he is not motivated at this
point to initiate behavioral changes necessary to adjust to the new reality.

Denial may take many behavioral forms.
The individual may appear temporarily
stunned or dazed, refuse to accept the
information given, insist there is some
mistake, not comprehend what has been
said, and so on. The denial mechanisms
act as “shock absorbers” to reduce the
impact of a sudden trauma and prepare
the individual for cognitive acceptance of
the situation. The duration of the denial
period depends upon the individual and
the circumstances, but is usually shortlived as reality-testing forces cognitive
awareness upon the individual. In fact,
this “shock phase” may often be so brief
as to be missed in ordinary clinical observation, or it may be absent in situations
where the trauma is introduced gradually
rather than suddenly.

The second stage of the coping sequence
is the reception of the cognitive input of
the trauma and attempts to deal with the
new situation on an intellectual level. It
is in this stage that we see the various
behavioral manifestations of anxiety and
anger. The individual now perceives the
change produced by the stress, but since
he has not yet adjusted to this new reality,
he experiences realistic fear. This fear is
manifested as anxiety in one or more of its
many forms: generalized nervousness, overactivity, irritability, headaches, fatigue,
insomnia, loss of appetite, somatic complaints, and so on. In the stage of cognitive
awareness the individual is distraught and
may become panic-stricken. His anxiety is

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

4 Falek and Britton

a response to the fear of the cognitively
perceived change in his psychological equilibrium, but he has not yet experienced his
psychological equilibrium as changed on
an emotional level. The stressful event has
been incorporated on a cognitive level only.

During this period, the individual initi
ates intellectual activities directed toward
reestablishing equilibrium. In his search for
alternatives, he may, for example, seek
new information which will help him to
understand or perhaps to undo the new
predicament. Basically, the individual is
motivated to relieve anxiety, and in spite
of the cognitively perceived change he
hopes to return to the old status quo. He
is striving for adjustment on an intellectual
level. .
Without the necessary emotional acceptance, such attempts at readjustment will
result in failure. Frustration is experienced
as intellectual maneuvers prove unsuccessful, and the individual becomes bitter and
hostile. We now have an angry individual
who sees his misfortune as the act of a
cruel and uncaring world. In such a state,
a person will openly exhibit hostility to
those around, including friends, relatives,
and medical personnel, without a rational
basis for his antagonism. The anger may
also be directed inwardly resulting in feelings of guilt. Both the guilt-ridden and
the angry individual are attempting to resolve their conflict and frustration by seeking a responsible agent.

Up to this point, the individual has
maintained the hope of returning to the
formerly established steady state. As attempts at resolving the problem at the
cognitive level repeatedly fail, hope diminishes and the individual is faced with the
emotional burden of the trauma. Russell
Davies (1964) describes depression as
habituation to repeated frustration and
reports a behavioral sequence from anxiety
to depression observed in individuals frus
Social Biology

trated in an experimental task. In a similar
sense, the individual attempting to resolve
this stress on an intellectual level only will
experience repeated frustration as reinforcement is not received. As habituation
occurs, the typical symptoms of depression
appear. The individual appears sad, withdrawn, and may exhibit a lack of interest
in his environment and usual activities.
As with denial, anxiety, and anger, depression is a normal phase of the coping sequence necessary for eventual readjustment.
Experiencing the change in psychological
equilibrium at the emotional level ushers
in the beginnings of more appropriate
behavioral change.

Since the normal person cannot function
in a continued state of depression and
recognizes that his old patterns will not
resolve the problem, he will begin trying
new behaviors in an attempt to adjust to
his current situation. He is now approaching a realistic adjustment since his behavioral changes emanate from an emotional
as well as a cognitive realization of the
stress. For stressful events of minimal
intensity, adjustment to a steady state will
require only a small degree of behavioral
change. For events of greater intensity, it
is probable that initial behavioral changes
will only approximate the necessary behavior for the establishment of a new psychological steady state. The individual may
experience temporary frustrations as he
tries out his new behavior and revert
back to an earlier phase such as denial or
anger. He may repeat the entire coping
sequence a number of times or fluctuate
between two predominant phases. The
characteristic pattern an individual displays will depend largely upon his previous
coping experiences.

As the individual makes closer approximations to the behavior necessary for the
establishment of a steady state, the intensity and the length of time spent in each
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 21, No. 1

of the coping phases will diminish. As the
sequence is repeated with diminishing
intensity, the individual is eased into a
new psychological equilibrium which can
then be maintained because it has been
gradually incorporated on an intellectual
and emotional level. This is the protective
function of the steady-state mechanism in
the psychological system, that is, to allow
the individual to gradually establish new
equilibriums in his constant adjustments
to the stresses of life. The application of
the steady-state hypothesis to clinically
observed coping reactions in individuals
under stress explains the consistent appearance of the denial, anxiety, anger, and
depression sequence in such individuals,
and the phenomena of cycling and fluctuating between these responses with diminishing intensity.

The coping sequence as described in this
report is basically similar to the “grief
process” as first reported by Lindemann
(1944) and later fully delineated by
Averill (1968) as an evolved biological
adaptive mechanism. Many of the studies
reported in Table 1 indicated that the
individuals under observation exhibited a
reaction to stress that was similar to the
“orief process.” The “grief process” has
been commonly accepted in the literature
as the typical reaction to the death or loss
of a loved one. More recently, research in
the subareas of the general field of grief
and bereavement has led to the idea of a
“separation reaction” as being the more
general phenomenon in which grief or bereavement reactions are but one type
(Volkart, 1957).

It can be argued that the coping sequence, as described here, is the more
general phenomenon in which separation
or grief reactions are but one type. It is
probable that the coping sequence is more
readily observed in situations of separation
or bereavement because of the more uni
 

Phases in Coping 5

form and universal nature of this particular form of stress. It is our opinion that
the coping sequence, as described here and
as explained by the steady-state hypothesis, is a universal reaction to any change
in the established steady state great enough
to produce stress in the organism and
occurs from infancy through adulthood in
response to minor as well as major traumas.

The basic and applied research implications which can be formulated from this
coping sequence—steady state hypothesis,
are potentially unlimited. From the viewpoint of mental health, an understanding
of the sequence of emotional responses that
psychologically normal individuals exhibit
in coping with new, infrequently met, as
well as recurrent daily situations, will help
medical personnel, psychologists, social
workers, clergymen, and others involved in
counseling situations to understand the
responses in individuals going through
trauma-induced coping sequences.

An evaluation of the coping sequence in
persons with specific diagnoses will be useful in order to determine whether their
disorder is a consequence of an inability
to progress through the coping sequence in
a normal manner. It may be that an inability to progress after a period of time
from one stage to another is the pattern
of the psychotic individual. Psychosis may
develop gradually after repeated accumulation of minor stresses for which psychological equilibrium was not reestablished
as well as suddenly following the failure
to reestablish equilibrium after a major
trauma. If an inability to progress through
the coping sequence is a biological function
that shows hereditary variability, it would
lend further support for the genetic basis
of specific mental disorders (Gottesman
and Shields, 1972; Kallmann, 1953;
Rosenthal, 1970). An ability to progress
through these stages, but an inability to
establish satisfactory new behavioral pat
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

6 Falek and Britton

terns, may well be characteristic of the
neurotic.

From a developmental point of view, it
is interesting to note that Spitz (1946)
observed a syndrome which he called
“anaclitic depression” in 6 to 9 month old
infants separated from their mothers. His
syndrome bears a remarkable resemblance
to the “grief process.”” From an evolutionary point of view, Kaufman and Rosenblum
(1967) and Harlow et al., (1971) noted
that when monkeys were separated from
their mothers, they exhibited a pattern of
behavior similar to Spitz’s “anaclitic depression.” There is ample evidence for the
occurrence of grief-like reactions in apes
and monkeys (Averill, 1968). If a similar
response pattern to stress is exhibited by
human infants and primates other than
man, the question arises as to whether the
coping sequence is triggered by a genetically controlled innate behavioral mechanism. Averill’s (1968) astute analysis of
grief supports such a possibility. The
steady-state hypothesis allows for such a
possibility, and as such is support for
Skinner’s (1971) hypothesis that the behavioral functions of man are programmed.

Comparative studies of concordance
rates between monozygotic and dizygotic
twins coping with similar traumatic situations may be useful in identifying the
hereditary component. Investigation of the
length and type of response for each phase
of the coping sequence in a series of twin
partners coping with a similar stressful
event should be of value in a detailed
genetic investigation of this newly identified behavioral response pattern. Experimentally induced stressful situations similar
to those conducted by Davies (1964) and
Korchin and colleagues (1960) should also
be employed in twin studies to further
help in the identification of the hereditary
component as well as elucidate some of

 

Social Biology

the physiological correlates of the observed
behavioral and emotional responses.

Checklists or self-report inventories may
be useful in more naturalistic settings. For
example, a checklist of emotional responses
as part of a patient’s hospital record would
enable the investigator to more closely observe coping patterns in a variety of illnesses. It should also be noted that while
all studies (Table 1) report observations
so similar that we are able to draw conclusions of a common coping sequence in
spite of the diversity of the stress situations
reported, there are individuals who may
vary from the specific pattern presented
here. Studies need to be conducted to
investigate the bases for such differences.

The application of the steady-state
hypothesis to clinically observed coping
reactions in individuals under stress explains the consistent appearance of denial,
anxiety, anger, and depression in such
individuals, and the phenomena of cycling
and fluctuating among these responses
with diminishing intensity. We should like
to stress that the universality of this
hypothesis and the possibility of its genetic
basis makes it a valuable area for research.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank J. H. Bruell, University of Texas;
R. Craddick, Georgia State University; S. Einstein, Jerusalem; L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling and
J. Zubin, New York State Psychiatric Institute, Columbia University; J. L. Fuller, State
University of New York, Binghampton; S. T.
Ginsberg, S. Jaffee, D. G. Miles, and F. A.
Quadfasel, Georgia Menta! Health Institute;
B. C. Holland and R. S. Ward, Emory University; J. S. Pearson, Witchita Clinic; and J. P.
Scott, Bowling Green State University.

The coping pattern as a response to everyday stresses was first recognized when one of
the authors (AF) observed the sequence of
reactions to events of major proportions displayed by his son James in dealing with suddenly remembered homework for elementary
school one Sundav evening after a weekend
during which its existence was often denied.

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 21, No. 1

Phases in Coping 7

REFERENCES

Arpricu, C. K, 1963, The dying patient’s grief.
J. Amer. Med. Assoc. 184:329.

AVERILL, J. R. 1968, Grief: Its nature and significance. Psychol. Bull. 70:721-748.

Barp, M. 1952. The sequence of emotional reactions in radical mastectomy patients. Publ.
Hlth, Rep. 67:1144,

Bozeman, M. F., C. E. Orspacu, and A. M.
SUTHERLAND, 1955. Psychological impact of
cancer and its treatment. JII. The adaptation
of mothers to the threatened loss of their children through leukemia. Part I. Cancer 8:1-19.

Brewster, H. 1952. Separation reaction in psy~
chosomatic disease and neurosis. Psychosom,
Med. 14:154.

Cnoporr, P., B. FrrepMan, and D. A. Hampurc.
1964, Stress, defenses and coping behavior:
Observations in parents of children with malig~nant disease, Amer, J. Psychiat. 120:743.

CocswELL, B. 1967, Rehabilitation of the paraplegic: Processes of socialization. Soc. Inq. 37:
11,

Davies, E. B. (ed.). 1964. Depression. Proceedings of the Symposium held at Cambridge,
September 22-26, 1959. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.

Encet, G. L. 1953. Homeostasis, behavioral adjustment and the concept of health and disease.
In R. Grinker (ed.), Mid-century psychiatry.
Charles C Thomas, Springfield, ll.

. 1962. Psychological development in health
and disease. W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia.

Fisuer, S. H. 1960. Psychiatric considerations of
hand disability. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehab. 41:
62.

Friep, M. 1963. Grieving for a Jost home. In
L. J. Duh! (ed.), The urban condition. Basic
Books, New York,

GotresMAN, I., and J. Suretps. 1972. Schizophrenia and genetics. Academic Press, New
York,

Grinxer, R. R. (ed.). 1967. Toward a unified
theory of human behavior. Basic Books, New
York,

Hampure, D. A., and B. Hamsurc. 1953, Adaptive problems and mechanisms in _ severely
burned patients. Psychiatry 16:1.

Hartow, H. F., M. K. Hartow, and &. J. Suomz.
1971. From thought to therapy: Lessons from
a primate laboratory. Amer. Sci. 59:538.

JANIs, Irvinc. 1958. Psychological stress. John
Wiley and Sons, New York.

Karrarann, F. J. 1953. Heredity in health and
mental disorder. W. W. Norton, New York.
KaurmMan, C. IL, and L. A. Rosensrum,. 1967,
Depression in infant monkeys separated from

their mothers. Science 155:1030-1031.

KEnNELL, J. H., H. StyTer, and M. H. Kraus.
1970, The mourning response of parents to the
death of a newborn infant. New Eng. J. Med.
283:344.

 

KorcuHin, S. J., and M. Herz. 1960. Differential
effects of “shame” and “disintegrative” threats
on emotional and adrenocortical functioning.
Arch. Gen, Psychiat. 2:640-651.

Kusier-Ross, E. 1969. On death and dying.
Macmillan, New York.

Lirton, R. J. 1954. Home by ship: Reaction
patterns of American prisoners of war repatriated from North Korea. Amer. J. Psychiat.
110: 732.

LINDEMANN, E. 1944. Symptomatology and management of acute grief. Amer, J. Psychiat. 101:
141.

MeEnnInGER, K. A. 1954. Psychological aspects of
the organism under stress. Part I. The homeostatic regulatory function of the ego. J. Amer.
Psychoanal, Ass. 2:67.

Parkes, C. M. 1965a. Bereavement and mental
illness. Part I. A clinical study of the grief of
bereaved psychiatric patients. Brit. J. Med.
Psychol. 38: 1.

. 19656. Bereavement and mental illness,
Part II. A classification of bereavement reactions. Brit. J. Med. Psychol. 38:13.

PEARSON, J. 1973. Behavioral aspects of Huntington’s Chorea. Jn A. Barbeau, T. N. Chase,
G. W. Paulson (eds.), Advances in neurology,
Vol. I. Raven Press, New York.

ROSENTHAL, D. 1970. Genetic theory and abnormal behavior. McGraw-Hill, New York.

ScHILpER, P. 1951, Psychotherapy. W. W. Norton,
New York.

SKINNER, B. F. 1971. Beyond freedom and dignity. A. A. Knopf, New York.

Sotnit, A., and M. H, Stacw. 1961. Mourning
and birth of a defective child. Psychoanal.
Stud. Chld. 16:523.

Sprrz, R. A. 1946. Anaclitic depression: An inquiry into the genesis of psychiatric conditions
in early childhood. II. Psychoanal. Stud. Child.

1313,

SUTHERLAND, A. 1952. Psychological impact of
cancer surgery. Publ. Hith. Rep. 67:1139-1143.

VisoTskyY, H. J., D. A. HamBure, M, E, Gross,
and B. Z. Lesovits, 1961. Coping behavior
under extreme stress, Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 5:
423.

VoLKarT, E. H. 1957. Bereavement and mental
health. In A. H. Leighton, J. A. Clausen, and
R. N. Wilson (eds.), Social psychiatry. Basic
Books, New York.

Wiener, J. M. 1970. Reaction of the family to
the fata] illness of a child. In B. Schoenberg,
A. C. Carr, D. Peretz and A. H. Kutscher
(eds.), Loss and grief: Psychological management in medical practice. Columbia Univ.
Press, New York.

WOLFENSTEIN, M, 1957. Disaster. The Free Press,
Glencoe, I.

WreTmark, G. 1959. A study in grief reactions.
Acta Psychiat. Neurol. Scand. 33:292.

 
