Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Discussion: Man's evolutionary future, session V

Richard H. Osborne

To cite this article: Richard H. Osborne (1972) Discussion: Man's evolutionary future, session V,
Social Biology, 19:4, 346-349, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9988007

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9988007

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:33
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Discussion: Man’s Evolutionary Future, Session V

Richard H. Osborne

University of Wisconsin
Madison, Wisconsin

Man’s evolutionary past and his complex evolutionary present have been subject almost totally to natural forces. It is
now apparent, however, that in the future
man will seek to influence his own evolution, whether it is by his technology (genetic engineering and selective breeding)
or by social means through the regulation
of births within an equalized environment
as proposed in the Eugenic Hypothesis.

This directive role in control of genetic
structure is not entirely a new one for man.
He has made some notorious attempts in
the past to selectively alter the genetic
composition of his populations by genocide; and he has scored remarkable successes in plant and animal breeding, though
not without error. There are grave warnings and important lessons to be taken
from these earlier experiences, as we consider the possibility of designing our genetic future. From past experience we have
learned: first, that the motives of all men
are not to be trusted; second, that selective
breeding requires highly sophisticated
knowledge—of the genotypes of individuals, of gene interactions, and of geneticenvironment interactions; and third, and
vitally important, that the preservation of
an extensive reservoir of genetic variation

 

is essential to meet future continuing selection demands.

It is unquestionable that man’s greatest
treasure is his store of genetic variability,
screened as it has been by the evolutionary
past and fitted through thousands upon
thousands of generations to the varied and
complex cultural and social environments
of the present. This, our legacy of genetic
variability, is threatened if we undertake
the direction of our own evolutionary future. It is a threat which can only increase
with time, because of events now in progress. The modern dissolution of most traditional barriers to a free exchange of
genes between populations is something
unique in human history. The commitment
of all of man’s genetic variability to a
single gene pool—iiterally, the putting of
all of our eggs in one basket—will reduce
the possibility of any second chances. In
the past, the multiplicity of gene pools
around the world were like multiple banks.
If one failed, there was still the genetic
variability in all the other gene pools that
could be reshuffled and redistributed to
meet new selection needs in response to the
population problem and doing so, differentially—because the effectiveness of our
control methods correlate with education
and economic circumstances.

346

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Vol. LY, No. 4

GENETIC ENGINEERING: THE PROSPECTS
FOR GENE TRANSFER AND CLONING

In this morning’s first paper, Dr. Davis
described the promise and marvels of the
technological advances with gene transfer
and cloning that may eventually make it
possible to construct or make to order desired phenotypes and manipulate the genetic material. These methods, singly and
in combination, will have inestimable value
for in vitro experimental studies, studies
which should be immensely important in
furthering our knowledge of the nature of
the genetic material, gene arrangement
and interactions, and through the culturing of haploid cells permit the identification of carrier states for aiding in genetic
counseling.

If these techniques were applied to the
actual manipulation of the human gene
pool, they would, of course, contribute to a
degradation of genetic variability and raise
many moral issues. But, this threat is theoretical rather than real at the moment.
The genetic distance from bacteria and
other simple organisms to man is profound,
and only limited engineering successes have
been scored with these. Prophecies of their
imminent application to man can only
serve to raise the spectre of scientific
bogey-men in the minds of the public and
threaten, if not prevent, serious scientists
from pursuing their research upon these
truly exciting and potentially valuable
techniques.

EUGENIC IMPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL
INSEMINATION AND ARTIFICIAL
INOVULATION

Dr. Glass has presented the eugenic implications of artificial insemination and
artificial inovulation. The first is a technique which is already with us and for
which there has been an extensive learning
experience from line breeding and from
actual artificial insemination in the animal

 

Discussion: Session V

347

industry. It has been increasingly used
with man; and of all the methods proposed
for the direct or intentional modification of
the human gene pool it is the only one
technologically feasible today. But even
this is woefully premature. There is not a
sufficient knowledge of the genetics of man
for its use other than as a solution to
sterility problems, or where a high risk of
genetic defect is known for a legally contracted mating.

The possible use of these methods as a
safeguard against radiation and chemically
induced mutations, as suggested by Dr.
Glass, should be given careful consideration; it could spell the difference between
the death and the survival of our species.

But artificial insemination and inovulation have been most often, or at least most
vocally, suggested as a means of directing
man’s future evolution. Dr. Glass has diplomatically presented his reservations
about these proposals. I am in full accord,
though my sentiments might better be
termed a strong opposition rather than a
reservation. I would therefore like to elaborate briefly on some of Dr. Glass’s comments, particularly in respect to some of
the lessons we should have learned from
our previous experience in this area.

Dr. Glass mentioned the tragedy in the
Swedish dairy industry caused by the excessive use of two German donor bulls.
This is not an isolated incidence. The
Percheron stallion, Superb, imported to
Japan to improve Japanese dray horses,
carried a lethal gene with devastating effects some six or seven generations later.
In Denmark, one fine Danish Red cattle
sire spread a paralysis gene to 26% of the
animals in two provinces before the cause
of the damage was recognized. Numerous
other examples could be cited from the
breeding industry.

There are two very sobering facts to be
added when we transfer this lesson to man.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

 

348

First, the six or seven generations required
to recognize the damage in horses and
cattle required a time span of only 25 to
50 years; for man it would be 125-150
years, or longer. Second, unlike man, accurate and detailed genetic information existed for many generations for each of the
selected sires. It also existed for their progeny which made it possible to eventually
identify the source of the problem and correct it; but “correction” required the destruction of all these animals descendants.
Comparable breeding records can not be
compiled for any person now alive, nor can
anyone’s descendants be comparably monitored; and future problems of defect could
not be corrected in man by such a method.
Until that day when heterozygous carriers
of all known severely defective mutants
can be recognized, multiple use of sperm
from single human donors is out of the
question.

But even before we get to this, how
should limited donors be identified? By
what criteria? Darwin chose intelligence
and sympathy; Muller, intelligence and
cooperativeness. For the sake of argument,
I would like to translate sympathy and
cooperativeness into responsibility. But
how do we select donors who will transmit
intelligence and responsibility to succeeding generations? Nobel laureates? Members of the National Academies? Even assuming that we reach a decision as to what
defines the most normal phenotypes, is it
their sperm that we want? No, it would be
that of their fathers who produced these
desired phenotypes. We would also need
biopsys of pre-meiotic germ cells of their
mothers who contributed one-half to these
desirable genotypes.

There are other lessons we should already have learned that we are also neglecting, like that of combining ability. It
has not been uncommonly found in the
breeding industry that strains that com
Osborne

 

Social Biology

bine the best in producing the desired phenotypes are those that in themselves are
least fitted for survival and deviate markedly in the favorable traits which they
produce in combination. This may not be
totally irrelevant for man. Many of our
greatest contributors to society could not
have been predicted on the basis of parental performance, nor have these great
men and women invariably produced offspring of comparable quality.

This brings us to the final point I wish
to make in regard to selective breeding
for man. It is obvious that the correlation
between genotype and phenotype is a complex problem in animal breeding. Now that
computers are with us and a massive
amount of genetic information has been
accumulated for those animals being selectively bred, a Selection Index of multiple
desirable criteria can be devised. The relevance of this for man is clear and I refer
you to a discussion of an Index of Social
Value by Gottesman and ErlenmeyerKimling (1971, p. S6).

Such an Index for man requires knowledge of the heritabilities of relevant traits,
which in turn involves knowledge of genetic-environment interaction far beyond
anything we presently possess.

Yes, we possess the techniques for artificial insemination; but we are far from
having the genetic knowledge to apply
these techniques for anything approaching
population-wide eugenic programs. Artificial inovulation is somewhat futuristic, but
has many possibilities as a research tool,
particularly for investigations of prenatal
development and maternal fetal interactions, areas in which we are woefully lacking in fundamental knowledge.

THE EUGENIC HYPOTHESIS

In the final paper of this morning’s session, Mr. Osborn and Dr. Bajema have reviewed, in so far as the data permits, the
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 19, No. 4

trends of the past few decades in respect
to reproductive performance and the single
variable of I.Q., and restated the Eugenic
Hypothesis. On the basis of the evidence
mustered, they have sounded a fairly optimistic note for man’s immediate evolutionary future, given continued improvement
of health, educational and occupational opportunities, and the widest possible dispersal of effective population control
methods.

The philosophies and the intent of the
Eugenic Hypothesis, of which Mr. Osborn
has been the chief architect over the past
thirty years, stand in important contrast
to those which would seek to immediately
muster the whole of modern technology to
the salvation and the direction of the
future of mankind. Rather then being
futuristic, the Eugenic Hypothesis places
emphasis upon an acceleration of those
processes presently in progress: the equalization of the educational and economic environments and the availability of effective
contraceptive methods to all segments of
society. In its ideal it de-emphasizes authoritative direction, relying instead upon the
natural processes of evolution operating
within an intentionally improved environment.

Improvement of the environment and its
equalization for all populations, and all
segments of any given population, could
at present improve the mean for most traits
critical to any reasonable index of social
value far more rapidly than could be hoped

Discussion: Session V

349

for by artificial insemination or any other
method which has been proposed. To quote
one well-known authority in human genetics, James Neel (1969, p. 1010):
“Much more is to be gained in terms of
human potential in the immediate future
through manipulation of the environment
to ensure a better realization of the genetic
potential of each of us, than in manipulation of the genotype.” Neel also provides a
sage comment on the danger inherent in
the alternatives to the above proposal: “In
the light of man’s proven ability to act in
haste and repent in leisure, it would require
an intellectual arrogance uncommon even
for Man to think after these few years of
human genetics as a discipline, we are
ready to tinker with our most precious possession, our germ plasm” (1969, p. 1009).

The greater the reduction we are able to
achieve in the environmental component of
variance in man’s total phenotypic variability, the more effective will become our
methods for elucidating the genetic component of this variability. What we must
have before we can consciously direct our
evolutionary future is a far greater knowledge of human genetics than we presently
possess; and for this, we must have the
freedom to apply with intelligence and responsibility all of the research techniques
being developed. This will not be possible
if the image of genetic and eugenic intent
is irresponsibly presented. Here, once
again, intelligence and responsibility are
man’s greatest need for his future.

REFERENCES

NEEL, James V. 1969. Thoughts on the future of human genetics. Med. Clin. No. Amer. 53:1008-1011.
