Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

“Heterosis in man”: A response

James H. Tinsman

To cite this article: James H. Tinsman (1971) “Heterosis in man”: A response, Social Biology,
18:2, 204-208, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1971.9987921

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1971.9987921

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

ee
(g Submit your article to this journal @
all Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles @

wa Citing articles: 1 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:54

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

204. Communications

‘*Heterosis in Man’’: A Response

James H. Tinsman

Department of Anthropology
University of Colorado
Boulder, Colorado

The recent article by Wolanski, Jarosz,
and Pyzuk (1970), published in this journal,
deals with matters of great interest to
several of us at the University of Colorado
where parental-birthplace distance and its

‘biological effects have been studied for the

past sixteen months, using a population
substantially different from that reported
upon by Wolarsiski et al.’ For this reason,
and for reasons inherent in the article itself,
it is important to raise a number of questions and problems and to offer some observations.

The crucial conclusion of the article
would seem to be given in several places,
especially page 15, item 2, where the
authors state that ‘‘the observed regularity
is apparently caused by crossbreeding, and
it ought to be assumed that this is an effect
of heterosis with a genetic or ecological
(physiological) base, or both.” Most of the
other conclusions (p. 14-15)? are of a descriptive nature and are subordinate to this
major concern with crossbreeding and
heterosis (consider the title of the article,
‘“‘Heterosis in Man’). The thrust of this
response rests chiefly on the way in which

1 A preliminary report on the results of the University of Colorado Anthropometric and Genetic
Survey is currently being prepared for publication.
However, the comments in this response do not
depend upon the Colorado results; they are directed
solely toward the article on heterosis in man by
Wolafiski, Jarosz, and Pyzuk.

2 All page references in this response are to the
article by Wolafiski et al. unless otherwise specified.

Social Biology

this conclusion was reached and on the
degree of support given for the conclusion.

The positive support claimed for the
position of the authors is found in Tables 7
and 9 (which the authors call ‘‘an assessment...of decisive importance for the
present study” [p. 6]) and the negative
support is given in Tables 10 and 11. These
two types of confirmation will be considered
and evaluated in turn.

In Table 7, arithmetic means are given,
by parental-birthplace distance intervals,
for stature, Quetelet’s index, and chest
circumference. These traits are said (p. 6) to
show a ‘‘marked trend toward an increase
as the distance between the birthplaces of
the parents increases.” An examination of
the data reported upon there casts serious
doubt upon this presumption. For each
trait reported upon, there are six categories
given—boys of 4 years, girls of 4, boys of 8,
gitls of 8, boys of 16, and girls of 16. To
illustrate the evidence presented in the
article for one trait, stature actually declines (admittedly only slightly) as distance
increases in two of these six categories, 1.e.,
the eight-year-olds of both sexes. In the
other four cases (for stature), the increase
in stature from those with a parentalbirthplace distance interval between 0 and
10 km. to those children whose parentalbirthplace distance is in excess of 300 km.—
the total increase in the arithmetic mean—
is, respectively, 5, 15,5, and 11mm.

As a first point, it should be noted that
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 18, No. 2

four or more successes (i.e., increases in
stature) out of six possibilities would occur
by chance about one third of the time,
surely not a significant showing. Secondly,
the magnitude of increase would seem frequently to be less than, or close to, the allowance for measuring error. The results
reported for chest circumference, for instance, suggest that the measurements were
made in tenths of millimeters which would
require the use of anthropometric equipment
of far greater precision than is available to
the average investigator. The third criticism
to be offered here results from the failure of
the authors to give us any test of the
significance of the changes over distance for
Table 7. It is therefore not known whether,
in those four cases for stature where
stature seems to increase slightly with
distance, the increase has any statistical
weight.

It might be objected that the crucial
character of Table 7 rests in the number of
times that a trait increase accompanies an
increase in distance. In each of the six
age-sex categories, there are five parentalbirthplace distance intervals (0~10, 11-50,
51-100, 101-300, over 300) and thus four
chances of increase (from 0-10 to 11-50,
etc.). Over the six age-sex categories, each
with four chances for change in the studied
trait with distance, there are then twentyfour possible chances for a trait to increase
with increasing distance intervals. The
actual number of increases are as follows:
stature, 15 increases out of 24 possibilities;
Quetelet’s index, 15 out of 24; and chest
circumference, 16 out of 24. Are these
significant as overall patterns? The probability of 15 (or more) successes out of 24
possibilities is in excess of 0.15 and thus not
significant at the level chosen for this paper
which is 0.05 (see Table 9). With chest
circumference, the 16 successes (increases)
out of 24 is less likely (p is approximately
0.076), but still not significant.’ It can only

Communications

205

be concluded that Table 7 is at best inconclusive with regard to the basic objective
of the paper.

Table 9 does not fare any better. In the
top half of this table (that part concerned
with supporting the conclusion of crossbreeding and heterosis) correlation coefficients are given for the association of the
five traits reported upon (stature, Quetelet’s index, chest circumference, head
circumference, and cephalic index) with
parental-birthplace distance. Significance is
here indicated (unlike Table 7) at the 0.05
level. The authors admit that nothing of a
supportive nature exists here (or elsewhere
in the paper) for a relationship between
cephalic index or head circumference and
parental birthplace distance. They do claim,
however, that the other three traits show
effective parental-birthplace distance correlations, and the published values do seem
to support this viewpoint. Unfortunately,
an examination of the published values
shows some mysterious trends. In the
distance-stature correlation, for instance,
there is an r of 0.145 in 4-year-old boys, an 7
of.0.781 in 8-year-old boys, and an r of
0.0898 in 16-year-old boys. The same pattern
holds for boys with regard to chest circumference and distance, Thus, parentalbirthplace distance matters a little at age 4,
tremendously at age 8, and not at all at the
age of 16 (in boys). To cite but one more
case, cephalic index and distance in girls, at
age 4 the correlation is awesomely negative
(—0.75), at age 8 it is respectably positive
(-+0.435), and at age 16 it is impressively
negative again (—0.49)).

An even more unusual aspect of the data
rests in the fact that the highest correlation
shown (0.781 for stature-distance in 8 year
old boys) contradicts the data of Table 7
for that same category. In Table 7 the total
change shown, if any change at all is shown

3’ These probabilities can be calculated in two
separate but confirming ways (see Peatman, 1962,
1963).

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

206 Communications

is for 8-year-old boys, and their stature is
down, not up; the correlation coefficient in
Table 9 should be close to zero, perhaps
even slightly negative. The same remarks
can be made for other items of Table 9 as
well, e.g., chest circumference in 8-year-old
boys, stature in 8-year-old girls, Quetelet’s
index in 16-year-old girls, and so on. It
would seem that at least some of the correlation coefficients reported have to be
wrong simply on the basis of internal
examination of Tables 7 and 9. The only
reasonable conclusions to be drawn are that
Table 9 presents highly dubious and confusing data and does not seem to be compatible with Table 7. All in all, the positive
support for explaining claimed regularities
in terms of crossbreeding and heterosis does
not seem to exist.

The negative argument to support the
crossbreeding-heterosis conclusion is most
interesting in terms of what is not presented.
The authors wish to rule out parental height
as a factor in offspring height, and in fact do
so verbally (p. 6, 11), but they never show a
relatively simple test of this—the correlation or non-correlation of parental height
with offspring height. Instead, the complexity of Tables 10 and 11 appear without
any explanation of the means by which
offspring height is normalized. Of course, if
Table 9 is correct with a correlation value
of 0.781 for stature-distance, then over half
(0.781 & 0.781) of the variation in height is
accounted for simply by parental-birthplace
distance, leaving 39% of the variation in
height (stature) to be explained by parental
height, nutrition, medical care, and all
other biological, social, and cultural factors.
Nutrition and medical care are simply not
mentioned in the discussion on page 11 as
relevant to the growth pattern said to be
shown for the children studied. ‘‘The possible role of social and economic factors has
also been discounted (p. 11)” without the
presentation of any evidence. In sum, the

Social Biology

negative supports to the basic conclusion in
fact seem to be themselves of negligible
weight.

There are many other points to be raised
concerning the article by Wolariski et al.,
but in the interest of saving time and space
they will be listed with only the briefest of
comment.

1. Why are no significance tests offered
for Tables 3 and 5? Does the height of the
parents of four-year-olds differ significantly
from that of eight-year-olds? Sixteen-yearolds?

2. In spite of the data presented in Table
4, it would seem that a rather large number
of parents must have been born during
World War II in Poland. The effects of the
war upon these parents in their first year or
two of life must have been substantial and
might well have been noted with regard to
Table 3 and with regard to the major conclusion of the article.

3. How true is it that “little importance
is attributed to investigations on the effects
of breeding” (p. 1), especially in view of the
authors’ statement (p. 12) admitting that
such studies have been carried out with
little or no heterosis effect having been
found?

4, Does not the statement offered so unqualifiedly about the results of crossbreeding.
(p. 2) run into contradictions by the authors
themselves on page 12 in statements about
the work of Morton and of Schork? Also,
the article immediately after the Wolarski
et al. article would seem to offer contradictory evidence to that of Wolanski et al. concerning crossbreeding (outbreeding) (Bresler, 1970).

5. While almost 1,900 children are included in the survey, only 1,500 families
seem to be involved (p. 2-3). Does this mean
that over 20% of the children reported on
have a sibling included in the survey? If so,
then over 40% of the total sample would
involve sibling sets (20% plus the 20% who
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

Vol. 18, No. 2

are their siblings) and a substantial part of
the sample would involve counting the
same genes and the same parental birthplace distance twice.

6. The full biological integration of
Szczecin (a city of 317,000 persons)—i.e.,
all persons in Szczecin who married after a
given date married within that city—would
seem to be a political rather than a biological
matter. Strictly speaking, the exact place at
which two persons marry and mate is biologically unimportant, especially when the
interest of the article concerns inbreeding
and crossbreeding. Full biological integration (in the sense of the authors) would also
mean that practically never does a person
return to marry his village sweetheart,
practically never does a person meet on
travels someone whom he or she later marries, practically never does a soldier whose
home is Szczecin meet and marry someone
while away from home in the service, and
practically never is a wedding held in the
village, town, or city of one of the marriage
partners’ parents.

7. How does the statement that the
“osrowth...of marriages...of parents
with distant birthplaces is accompanied by
a decrease in the frequency of marriages in
which the birthplaces of the spouses were
nearby” (p. 4) accord with the data of Table
2, to which the statement refers, in which
we see the frequency of short parental
birthplace distance marriages (in Szczecin)
increasing in percentage much more than
the frequency of great parental-birthplacedistance marriages? For example, Szczecin
marriages of persons with a birthplace
distance of 0 to 10 have increased 367% in
twelve years, while the increase for persons
with a birthplace distance in excess of 300
km. has been only 168%.

8. In view of the fact that information is
given for Quetelet’s index and for stature,
why isn’t the data on weight which is
needed to calculate Quetelet’s index re
Communications

 

207

ported? A similar question can be raised
about the absence of data on head length
and head breadth in view of the use of ©
cephalic index in the article.

9, The notion of “pure” races (p. 13) has
no clear meaning in the context of the
article and is difficult to justify in terms of
contemporary human genetical and evolutionary thought.

10. Do not the conclusions about crossbreeding and heterosis based on studies of
parents and offspring fail to consider those
married persons who are childless? If heterozygosity tended to result in fewer children (see Bresler, 1970) would that not be a
selective disadvantage of substantial proportions?

11. The presumption that an increase
in stature (or any other continuously distributed quantitative trait) over distance is
evidence of heterozygosity (see especially p.
2, 11, 14-15) and thus of heterosis is unfounded. With a polygenic trait the extremes will result from substantial homozygosity, while heterozygosity will produce
the middle values. For example, if trait X is
controlled by three loci (A, B, C) each with
two alleles (Aa, Bb, Cc) and if the effects
are additive (a. g, A=B=C=t;a=
b=c=0) then the two extremes are
AABBCC (=6) and aabbcc (=0). These
are the ultimate in homozygosity. The extreme in heterozygosity is AaBbCc (=3), a
middle value for that trait. Thus, if Wolaziski et al. in fact had shown a stature (etc.)
increase with distance, they still would not
have demonstrated what they set out to
show.

These are some of the major questions
raised rather than answered by this article.
Perhaps it is best to conclude with a suggestion directed toward future studies of
this sort. If an investigator is interested in
the effects of inbreeding and outbreeding
it is better to collect data on genetic systems that are well understood. In this article

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

208 Communications

by Wolanski, Jarosz, and Pyzuk there is
much discussion about increased parental
birthplace distance resulting in increased
heterozygosity (e.g., p. 2, 11), but the investigations reported upon involve the genetically complex and poorly understood anthropometry of height, weight, head size,
and the like. Much more informative would
have been serological studies involving MN,
Ss, Cc, and other antigen systems.

Social Biology

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

In writing this response the author has profited
from discussions with A. J. Kelso, Professor of
Anthropology, University of Colorado and
Director of the University of Colorado Anthropometric and Genetic Survey, and with Kenneth
L. Beals, Assistant Professor of Anthropology,
Oregon State University. In addition, Professor
Kelso has read and favorably commented upon
the earlier draft of this response. Both Professors
Kelso and Beals agree with the general character of the comments although the final wording
is mine alone.

REFERENCES

BRESLER, JACK B. 1970. Outcrossings in caucasians
and fetal loss. Soc. Biol. 17:17-25,

PEATMAN, JOHN G. 1963. Introduction to applied
statistics. Harper and Row, New York.

Heterosis Again

Napoleon Wolanski

Department of Developmental Mor phophysiology
National Research Institute of Mother and Child
Warsaw, Poland

Mr. Tinsman’s remarks are perhaps not
so much addressed to the problem of heterosis itself as to several problems of methodology of scientific research. In these remarks the well-known method was used to
suggest something that was not said in the
paper, nor, in the author’s opinion, does it
by any means result from his paper. Let us,
however, analyze the remarks of Mr. Tinsman on our paper (Social Biology 17:17—
25).

1. If either Table 7 or 9 would settle
matters unequivocally, we should not have
considered it necessary to publish both
these tables, but only one of them. In Table
7, the authors had in mind to investigate to
what an extent the somatic characters under

WotaANsKI, NAPOLEON, EarrA Jarosz, and M1ra
Pyzux. 1970. Heterosis in man: Growth in
offspring and distance between parents’ birthplaces. Soc. Biol. 17:1-16.

study systematically grow or decrease concomitantly with the increase in distance be
_ tween the birthplace of the father and that

of the mother. For this purpose the material
was divided into cohorts each with a characteristic range of distances (e.g., a class
up to 10 km. is a village or a district of a
town where there are great chances for the
people to meet, as we have written in the
paper; see page 3). Five cohorts were thus
formed, and four differences were calculated.
It was known beforehand that even if all
four differences had the same sign (direction
of change), this would not have amounted to
a statistical proof. This results from the
fact that even as abundant material as ours
cannot be broken up into many classes,
