Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

The Mindel C. Sheps award in mathematical
demography

To cite this article: (1973) The Mindel C. Sheps award in mathematical demography, Social
Biology, 20:4, 474-474, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1973.9988079

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1973.9988079

 

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lil Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

4.74, Communications

Social Biology

The Mindel C, Sheps Award in Mathematical Demography

Nominations are requested for the Mindel C. Sheps Award in Mathematical Demography, to be presented for the first
time in 1974 and every second year thereafter. The award has been established by
the Mindel C. Sheps Memoria] Fund and
is sponsored by the Population Association
of America and the University of North
Carolina School of Public Health. It will
be given in recognition of outstanding contributions to mathematical demography or
demographic methodology.

Individuals should be nominated for this
award on the basis of important contributions to knowledge, either in the form of a
single piece of work or a continuing record
of high accomplishment. The award is intended to honor an individual whose future
research achievements are likely to continue a past record of excellence rather
than as a tribute to a demographer who is
ending an active professional career. There
are no specific requirements as to age,
nationality, or place of residence, nor is
the award restricted to members of the
Population Association of America.

The award is named for Mindel C. Sheps
who, at her death in January, 1973, was
Professor of Biostatistics at the University
of North Carolina School of Public Health
and Second Vice-President of the Population Association of America. She enjoyed a
distinguished career as physician, biostatisticlan, and demographer, applying mathe
The Scheinfeld Center for Human

The growing interest in human genetics
among social scientists has prompted the
establishment of a new Center at The
Hebrew University, through the medium
of the American Friends of The Hebrew
University.

matics and statistics to studies in these
areas. She received greatest recognition for
studies of the relationships between the
biological determinants of fertility and observable demographic variables. This work
focused on the development of mathematical and computer simulation models of
human reproduction and population change
and on analysis of measurement problems
in actual populations. She served as advisor or consultant to many international
projects, Her extensive publications include
several books, Public Health and Population Change, On the Measurement of Human Fertility (an annotated translation
of work by Louis Henry), and Mathematical Models of Conception and Birth,

The recipient of the Mindel C. Sheps
Award will be selected by a committee appointed by the President of the Population
Association of America and the Dean of
the University of North Carolina School of
Public Health. Presentation of the award,
comprising a certificate and $1,000, will
be made at the annual meeting of the Population Association of America.

To be considered for the first award,
nominations must be received by February
15, 1974. Nomination forms may be obtained from: Chairman, Mindel C. Sheps
Award Committee, Population Association
of America, P.O. Box 14182, Benjamin
Franklin Station, Washington, D.C. 20094.

Genetics in the Social Sciences

Endowed by Mrs. Aaron Scheinfeld of
Chicago in memory of her late husband
(who was chairman of Manpower Inc.),
and in honor of his brother Amram (author
of many books on human genetics), the
new educational unit has been named the

 
