Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Economic security, informational resources,
and women's reproductive choices in urban
Mozambique

Victor Agadjanian

To cite this article: Victor Agadjanian (1998) Economic security, informational resources,
and women's reproductive choices in urban Mozambique, Social Biology, 45:1-2, 60-79, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1998.9988964

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1998.9988964

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
CA | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 30
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 2 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:47

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

 

Economic Security, Informational Resources,
and Women’s Reproductive Choices in
Urban Mozambique

 

Victor Agadjanian

Department of Sociology
Arizona State University
Tempe, Arizona 85287-2101

ABSTRACT: Reproductive changes in sub-Saharan Africa are contingent upon women’s socioeconomic conditions and informational and cultural resources. This study focuses on socioeconomic
and cultural determinants and correlates of the intention to stop childbearing and of contraceptive use among urban women in Mozambique. It uses data from a survey of 1,585 married
women conducted in Greater Maputo in 1993, and it employs logistic regression for multivariate
analysis. The results of the analysis indicate that although the stopping intention and contraceptive use are interrelated and similarly affected by such factors as education or the area of residence, the intention to stop childbearing is mainly driven by women’s perception of their material conditions and socioeconomic security, while contraceptive use is largely a product of social
diffusion and the legitimization of innovative, Western-origin information and technologies. The
study proposes that these findings may help explain the unique features of the fertility transition
in sub-Saharan Africa.

Recent human history has witnessed a__ of informational and economic resources
nearly universal trend from larger to that offer them at least some economic
smaller families. Despite its global im- autonomy and social independence from
pact, however, this trend is complex and _ traditional, lineage-based norms and oblimultidimensional. In today’s sub-Saharan gations. On the other hand, urban women’s
Africa, this complexity is embedded in detachment from the traditional system
broader social transformations generated often leads to a loss of the social cushionby both internal dynamics and by the im- ing and assistance that lineage and marportation—direct or indirect, forced or riage networks usually provide in the
voluntary—of Western technology, socio- rural setting. Urban life, as Clignet once
cultural institutions, and lifestyles. put it, “increases both the inconsistencies

Reproductive changes have been most of a woman’s status and the number of
advanced in sub-Saharan cities because _ strategies that she can utilise to cope with
urban dwellers have greater exposure to them” (Clignet, 1967, p. 277). Using data
alternative economic strategies, cultural from Maputo, the capital and largest city
styles, and social networking than do of the Republic of Mozambique, this
small-town and rural residents (National study illustrates and explores these intriResearch Council, 19934). Urban repro-__ cate links between social change and reductive dynamics are closely linked to production by focusing on two elements
the contradictory changes women’s lives of fertility-related attitudes and behavundergo in the city. On the one hand, ur- itor—the intention to stop childbearing
ban women gain access to a great variety and the use of contraception.

60

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

The intention to stop childbearing is a
measure of the “ceiling” of desired fertility.
Of course, this ceiling, as African women
and men set it, is seldom definitive. In today’s sub-Saharan cultural context, the desirability of childbearing remains undisputed and its limitation is often considered
temporary, circumstance-driven, and potentially reversible. But regardless of its
strength, persistence, and realization, the
intention to stop childbearing reflects a
clear departure from pro-natalist or noninterference attitudes that commonly prevail
in a pre-transitional society.

Contraceptive use in this study is defined as any experience with Westernorigin or modern reversible methods of
fertility control. In an environment with a
very low contraceptive prevalence—of
which Mozambique is typical—any attempt to use contraception, regardless of
its duration and clinical effectiveness, indicates a new type of reproductive behavior requiring knowledge and acceptance
of an imported technological and sociocultural practice.

The intention to stop childbearing and
contraceptive use are positively correlated, since both are influenced by similar
economic and socionormative constraints
(Westoff, 1990); yet I argue that these
two phenomena are essentially different.
Once fertility limitation becomes thinkable and acceptable, the intention to have
no additional children emerges as a radical, but at the same time, simply articulated decision. In contrast, contraceptive
use may not purport an objective as radical, but it is a much more complex action
that requires a certain minimum of Westermized cultural, informational, and technological preparedness. Thus, I consider
them as two compatible but distinct manifestations of women’s reproductive ad
Reproductive Choices 61

justment to perceived economic and informational conditions of urban life.

My conceptual schema can be seen as
part of the ongoing dialogue in demography and related fields over the roles of
demand for children versus diffusion factors in reproductive change (Pollak and
Watkins, 1993). I suggest that the intention
to stop childbearing is mainly driven by
demand for a smaller family resulting
from individuals’ perception of their material conditions and socioeconomic security. In contrast, the acceptance of modern
family-planning methods is largely a
product of social diffusion and the legitimization of innovative, Western-origin information and technologies. I test this
schema by relating each of these outcomes
to women’s sociodemographic, socioeconomic, and ethnocultural characteristics.

I do not intend to explore and measure
the effects of the intention to stop childbearing and of contraceptive use on completed fertility. Although the assessment
of such effects represents an ultimate
concern of demographers and population
policymakers, it lies beyond the theoretical scope of this study, which focuses on
the initial rather than concluding stages
of reproductive behavior. However, the
overall depressing impact of both the
stopping intention and contraceptive use
on parity is implied.

As is the case with most fertility studies, I limit this analysis to the women’s
side of reproductive life. Of course, procreation is not an exclusively female
domain, and decisions regarding fertility
are made within the household and therefore involve husbands and extended kin
(Isiugo-Abanihe, 1994; Mott and Mott,
1985). This fact does not mean, however,
that the ideas women express and the actions they take with respect to childbearing

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

62

contradict the position of their partners,
kin, and affines. In sub-Saharan societies,
women’s childbearing-related choices reflect neither random individual caprices
nor docile compliance with their husbands’ will; their motivations and actions
are deeply rooted in and determined by
the dominant gender and procreative ideology (Renne, 1993).

I also limit this analysis to women who
are in marital unions—formal or informal.
In contemporary Africa, matrimony remains practically universal and most reproductive events happen during marriage.
As aresult, despite the growing number of
births that occur outside of marriage, reproductive attitudes and behavior of
women in marital unions continue to determine fertility trends in society at large.

Greater Maputo, the site of this research, is in many ways typical of subSaharan cities. However, it differs from
the majority of them in at least three
important aspects. First, Maputo is characterized by a unique interplay of Portuguese and Bantu linguistic and cultural
traditions. Through centuries of interaction, the two originally distant cultures
have melded to produce a complex and
multidimensional sociocultural alloy. Second, for a decade and a half after Mozambique’s independence from Portugal
in 1975, the socialist policies pursued by
the FRELIMO government halted and depressed the socioeconomic differentiation
of the African population (which even
during colonial times had not been very
pronounced). As a consequence, ethnocultural diversity thrived against the
backdrop of considerable socioeconomic
homogeneity. Only from the late 1980's
did the government slowly begin to liberalize the economy and to dismantle the
welfare net created during the socialist

 

Agadjanian

 

Social Biology

years. An economic elite began to
emerge, as the destitute poor multiplied.
Concurrent with the unraveling of economic reforms, Maputo has experienced
an unprecedented openness to foreign
cultural influences through radio, television, and movies; through imported consumer tastes and products; and through
other channels. And finally, the third—
and tragic—peculiarity of Maputo is the
impact of a brutal civil war that ravaged
independent Mozambique during most of
its existence until almost the end of 1992.
Although the hostilities, which devastated
the countryside, never spilled over into
the capital city itself, their indirect impact
was immense, especially since the late
1980’s, when the conflict engulfed the
country’s southern region. The war intensified rural migration to Maputo, particularly of women and children, and
substantially diminished contacts of the
city’s residents with rural areas.

For various historical and political reasons, the sociodemographic and family
planning dynamics of Mozambique, and
of Maputo in particular, have not been
well studied, and the existing data are
patchy and unreliable, even by modest
sub-Saharan standards. The National
Demographic Survey, conducted in Mozambique in 1991, estimated the population of Greater Maputo at 1.3 million
(Reptiblica de Mocambique, 1995), although the actual size of the city population might have been considerably larger.
A survey conducted in 1987 estimated
the birth rate in Greater Maputo at 36.9
per thousand, compared to 52.5 in accessible rural areas (Monreal, 1991:3.11).
According to the same survey, the prevalence of effective contraception (including sterilization) was 15.2 per cent in Maputo, much higher than the 3.7 per cent

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

rate found in Mozambique’s rural regions. Another survey, conducted in 1991
among a small sample of women in some
peri-urban areas of Maputo, estimated the
total fertility rate at 4.8 children per
woman (Graham et al., 1991, p. 22). Unpublished estimates of the total fertility
rate in the city derived from the 1991 National Demographic Survey oscillated
around five children per woman, although
varying considerably, depending on the
adjustment technique used (National Directorate of Statistics, 1993).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

DATA

This study is based on a survey conducted in Greater Maputo in 1993, following more than two years of preparatory
ethnographic research. The survey sample
consisted of 1,585 randomly selected
women who recently had a normal birth
in one of the city’s six maternity wards or
who had brought their babies there for
registration and vaccination shortly after
delivering them elsewhere. Unusual for
sub-Saharan Africa, over 95 per cent of
births in the city are reported to take place
in a medical institution (Reptblica de
Mocambique, 1993, p. 161). If the cases
of women who bring their babies to a maternity ward after birth are added, the
number of women who pass through maternity clinics during or right after childbirth approaches 100 per cent. Even if the
reported proportion of deliveries which
occur at maternity wards is somewhat inflated, the chosen sampling procedure
would still yield a fairly representative
sample of married and reproductively active Maputo women.

Reproductive Choices 63

The survey sample was restricted to
women in a marital union (formal or informal) who resided permanently in Greater
Maputo. The sampling frame also excluded
women who had fewer than two living children, because the ethnographic evidence I
collected in Maputo suggested that a vast
majority of married women do not seriously consider terminating thetr childbearing until after having at least two children.

RESPONSE VARIABLES

Intention to stop childbearing.—The
intention to stop childbearing is a dichotomous variable dividing the sample
into those who said that they did not want
to have more children in the future versus
all others. Among the survey respondents,
the potential stoppers constituted 42.7 per
cent; the rest wanted more or were not
sure. Admittedly, the recency of confinement could have affected the respondents’ fertility desires. The bias, however,
may not be large; in several sub-Saharan
Demographic and Health Surveys, fielded
in more conventional settings, the percentages of declared stoppers among urban women were about as high as in the
Maputo survey (cf. Burundi, 1988, p. 54;
Ghana, 1989, p. 54). In any case, in this
study I do not view the intention to stop
childbearing as a solid precursor of subsequent fertility performance but rather as
a sign of the “thinkability” of fertility
limitation.

Contraceptive use.—The other response variable, contraceptive use, is also
a dichotomous variable and is operationalized as having ever used any moderm contraceptive method—mainly oral
contraceptives (the Pill), the intrauterine
device (IUD) and injectables (mainly
Depo-Provera). The ever-contraceptors
made up only 29.8 per cent of the sample.

 

 
 

 

64 Agadjanian

EXPLANATORY VARIABLES AND
CORRESPONDING HYPOTHESES

This subsection briefly describes the
explanatory variables to be used in this
analysis and proposes hypotheses about
their association with the response variables. The definition and distribution of
the explanatory variables are presented in
Table 1.

Number of living children.—Because
the economic contributions of children to
their households’ economic well-being
and to parents’ old-age support is limited
in the urban milieu, the number of children becomes a measure of the financial
burden carried by urban families. Previous research has established a negative
relationship between parity and demand
ra for children (Frank, 1987), and I expect
Sp that the number of children will be posi
tively correlated with the intention to
= stop childbearing. At the same time, the
© number of children does not influence
women’s access to Westernized informational resources, and I therefore do not
anticipate any effect of this variable on
— contraceptive use.
Education.—Education is measured as
-© the number of completed years of formal
S schooling. Formal education both ex8 pands women’s socioeconomic opportu4 hities and autonomy, and exposes them

to Westernized cultural influences. The
cross-national evidence of the strong relationship between education and reproductive behavior is overwhelming (see,
e.g., Jejeebhoy, 1995), and I expect to
find a positive association between this
predictor and both response variables.
Radio ownership.—Most _ surveyed
women were unable to report accurately
their individual and household income,
and I use ownership of a radio set as an

at 13:47 08 December 2015

ich

M

ty

1

Univers

d by

Social Biology

approximate measure of household material well-being. In a society that still
places a considerable emotional premium
on large offspring, greater wealth should
be conducive to higher desired fertility
and therefore, other things being equal,
correlate negatively with the intention to
stop childbearing. However, the material
conditions do not necessarily influence
women’s informational resoufces and
their access to contraceptives, most of
which are distributed free of charge
through a network of state-run clinics. I
therefore do not expect to find any significant association between radio ownership and contraceptive use.

Work for income.—Based on the existing evidence with regard to women’s participation in the paid workforce (Oppong,
1983; Shapiro and Tambashe, 1994; Ware,
1977), I propose that the type of employment may have greater importance for reproductive decisions than whether or not
one works outside the home. Accordingly,
in this analysis I distinguish three employment categories—not working for
pay, waged or salaried employment
(roughly corresponding to the formal sector), and self-employment (the informal
sector). I expect to find that self-employed
women—mainly market or street vendors—whose greater economic autonomy
is another side of greater economic vulnerability, are particularly likely to express an
intention to have no more children. On the
other hand, women who are employed in
the formal sector are a highly Westernized
minority of the city’s female population.
The collectivized environment in which
most of them work is propitious for the
exchange of imported ideas and practices.
I therefore expect that working for a wage
or salary increases the likelihood of having tried modern contraception.

 

 

 

 
Vol. 45, No. 1-2 Reproductive Choices 65

TABLE 1
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FOR ALL VARIABLES

Variable Statistic

 

Response variables
Intention to stop childbearing (per cent)

Wants 16 MOre CHIC usec onmannnannmanencnninmanniseesimmeamensenainentevennnsegss 42.7
SVAN: MONE! OF RUSTING es cencecnencacrseansuexssuseracconnesmamemenaemnreanenmnemmaammennaen ane 57.3
Use of modern contraception at any moment in life (per cent)
Used at least OnE .......cccssccssssscsssessesessstscssessessesnsesssensensassessesseuscaseesanqreesscecnsensenss 29.8
Never used .........cscssccscsssssssescescosensenscescensensssseacessssetoesonseessesenusasensessenseseseaseaceacsareass 70.2
Explanatory variables

e Number of living children (mean, standard deviation) ............cscsscesesssssesteesereesenes 3.8 (1.8)
= Completed years of education (mean, standard deviation)... ceesssesseseececeeseees 3.1 (20)

5 Radio ownership (per cent) .

Oo Household Owns @ radio..........cceescessessesssescetsscesessscseereacesssesesseeseaseesseasecnsensesonsenses 75.6

= Household Owns n0 radio 00... csescescescesesscssesececascecossassacencecensneescecenenteursessneaseass 24.4

o Work for income (per cent)

Q Does, net werk fot (GCE eosccacncenanconmcnsensmenenmacexspeemannmanaxggnmaanimmansggpuannnngS ey 69.5
oo Self-employed cccsccacssenscessessercesnessnvacsssnrsecenacnsecanacenvenvsnenixcatsa anon cecsecsavesnnsnsaenucaveses 22.1
So
“a rs es Tier ee eT i SEDI sesoesssrexonorcomemancecesorenmesessmenemas men ION RRRAA NN RRRNOTAN TN 8.4
i Interethnic marital union (per cent)

“ Same native tongue aS Husband’S..........scecsessesesssseseescssonsnesaseensessrsensneseseateevaseaees 49.4

+ Not same native tongue as husband’s .0......cccccsescceseneeseeseeseensetensssseseessesensssesseenees - 50.6
— Bridewealth (Jobolo) status of marital union (per cent)

a Bridewealth paid .sesssssssccccsscsseccsscsssseccccsssssssssseeseesesensenssssueseeseceeeressessansesseeeeserseesnees 56.1
= Bridewealth not paid.........ccsccsssscssssscsseccssseessesccsseessssecsssccesnecsstscssuecessaeessneesseessnsess 43.9
‘0 Monogamous or polygynous marital union (per cent)
> NMONGSATOUS .,.rr.nps sin suxucsi cuss entsas 188 leew HEISE Siew eg AARTET cere eyHTOEATIA envergitNNTG beedegey 80.3
ro Pol 92 91S xcsevawsananneees exon neon anssumnerasencanumeneuanvenasncumian nexansaaaeceisnnanaeaeanaceneuRcomaNE METAR 19.7

> Type of residence (per cent)
= Coresides with affines Only..........cscssesscssssscrsescssssestcetcensesssssessessesssenseaseasvaterseseenes 38.5

iB Coresides with husband, and children only (no extended Kin)..............cesscseeseessees 42.1

2 Coresides with own kin or childern ony cassesisccssearsorcsvsnevessncsnsissvscveseseorenenassie 19.4
5 Daily use of the Portuguese language (per cent)
— Does mot use Portuguese........cseccsscssssssctserssscssessesscnseveesscssererssesesssssaseeeseeeseessonsees 38.2
BS Uses Portuguese occasionally .......cccccssesssesscrcsnsssssessscnsesessscesssaressssesesasereereaseasees 43.6
oo Uses mainly/only Portuguese .........ccccsesceseeneenescssssnsensencosanssessensecesessseseaneneesesseenee 28.3
— Religious affiliation (per cent)

Ss Big church Or reli gin ccnncncssscemarsasassnmanacsmnasercmancnanmamenemenssreessuwenecass 53.4
"S A Zionist (Zione) ChUICH .......s.ssessessesseesesseseessenessessessessessnssessessenseseseeeserenseneaseaneees 27.3
e No Teligious affiliation ........ ee eesccssecstencssesccteccsnsesenceeseetsasestecseaesneetensesteeeensetenee 19.4
Q Area of residence in Maputo (per cent)

Lives in a central area Of the CY .cossscssscesnssesnesnsasnennsncavanserseonessaenvsssansnmenneeveaes 44.3
Lives in a peripheral area Of the City... ee sesssesesercssessersensesssssasereensesesseeteareesaee Jas7
Duration of residence in Maputo (per cent)
Lived in Maputo before 10/1986 ........cessessctsersesesestssssensnsessesssscenssssssescessesseseaseats 78.2
Tnemiprated to Mapiite after LO/MDSG iiss cisansnsesssnesan cesnvcanawscecnganescascansnagypoucencocearses 21.8
Control variables
Age (mean, standard deviation) ......c.ccsssesscsscsssesssscsensceseeceseetscrsessosssseseereesasseseeseeneens Li (5)
Living sons (per cent)
Has at least ONE SOM .......scseesecseseeeserccscessensetsersasssasscesensensessessensonseseseateerentseresnentenes 86.9
HESS 100 SOT pea ncsnaggeesacensomnesesvserercesennnvawacnys vessnareveaneesegnuaeainys ais MaNOMERNS DET Se tERLIN En 13.1
Living sons, youngest child excluded (per cent)?
Had at least one living son prior to last birth... eecssscesceseeessecesseeseseescasseeees 75.9
Had no living son prior to last Dirth........eecssssesssseresesenesssesseneesecsstscssrsessessessetees 24.2

“Used in the analysis of contraceptive use.

 
] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Downloaded by [University of Michigan

66

Interethnic marital union.—Marriage
across ethnic boundaries, here approximated by difference in spouses’ native
tongues, becomes increasingly common
in the urban milieu. Women in such marital unions may be more independent from
the constraints and obligations that normally bind a traditional homogamous
marriage, but may also feel greater vulnerability due to the lack of social support and stability that homogamous marriage traditionally provides. Therefore I
expect that having a husband of a different ethnolinguistic background strengthens the intention to stop childbearing
compared to having a husband of the
same ethnolinguistic origin. Interethnic
marriage, however, does not automatically increase women’s access to Westernized informational resources, and I expect no significant association between
this variable and contraception.

The bridewealth status of marriage.—
Despite its significant erosion in the urban
milieu, bridewealth, called Jobolo in
southern Mozambique, remains an essential—if unofficial—social institution, almost synonymous with complete marriage. Since the payment of lobolo limits a
woman’s autonomy and implies an obligation on her to produce many offspring, I
expect that being in a union cemented by
bridewealth decreases the likelihood of expressing the intention to stop childbearing.
At the same time, the payment of lobolo
does not preclude urban women’s access
to Westernized cultural information, and
therefore I do not expect any effect of
bridewealth on contraceptive use.

Polygyny.—There is no consensus in
the literature on the effect of polygyny on
reproduction in sub-Saharan Africa (Muhsam, 1956; Clignet, 1970; Burch, 1983;
Pison, 1986; Pebley and Mbugua, 1989).

 

Agadjanian

 

Social Biology

Polygyny in cities is not as common as in
rural areas because of an unfavorable sex
ratio, the decline of agricultural activities .
in which women’s contribution is particularly valuable, and stronger moral and religious objections (Clignet, 1970, p. 22).
Moreover, an urban polygynous union is
different from a rural one: in the city,
women married to polygynous men become more independent from their husbands but also receive much less support
from them. Their socioeconomic vulnerability may give them an incentive for restricting fertility. I therefore expect that
being in a polygynous union increases the
probability of the intention to stop childbearing. On the other hand, being in an
urban polygynous union per se does not
limit women’s access to Westernized informational resources and hence should
not affect their contraceptive use.

Type of coresidence.—In this analysis
I consider three types of coresidence:
with the husband and children only, with
the in-laws, and with the woman’s own
relatives or her children only. Married
women’s coresidence with their affines is
a traditional norm in Mozambique’s patrilineal south and usually means greater
dependence on husband and his kin but
also a higher degree of traditional security. In contrast, married women’s sharing
the roof with their own kinfolk, let alone
coresiding with their children only, is an
anomaly that connotes both greater autonomy from husbands and greater socioeconomic insecurity. Hence I hypothesize that coresidence with own relatives
or with children only correlates with a
stronger intention to stop childbearing in
comparison to coresidence with in-laws.
On the other hand, living in a two-parent
nuclear household, 1.e., with the husband
and children only, represents the most

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

Westernized coresidence pattern in today’s sub-Saharan cities. I assume that
this coresidence arrangement connotes
greater access to Westernized informational resources, and I therefore expect
that it is positively associated with contraceptive experience.

Use of Portuguese——In Maputo the
Portuguese language is the principal conduit for Western-origin normative and
technological information, and the use of
Portuguese in daily life is one of the
strongest indicators of an individual’s integration into the Westernized urban culture. For this analysis I constructed a
three-level index variable of Portuguese
use in daily life: not using Portuguese at
all, using it occasionally, and using
mainly or only Portuguese. The information on such a typical Western-origin resource as modern contraception is most
likely to circulate through Portuguese language circuits; hence I expect an increase
in the chances of having contracepted at
each higher stage of Portuguese use. On
the other hand, the use of Portuguese per
se may not be related to women’s perception of their socioeconomic conditions.
Accordingly, I do not anticipate any significant net effect of Portuguese use on
the intention to stop childbearing.

Religious affiliation. —The association
between religion and reproduction is
commonly construed as either an artifact
of social traits that characterize members
of certain denominations or a direct product of religious tenets and proscriptions
(Mosher and Goldscheider, 1984). My
conceptualization of religious affiliation
in the urban sub-Saharan context instead
emphasizes participation and networking.
Membership in a religious group places a
woman in intensive contact with other
women, often of very different back
 

 

Reproductive Choices 67

ground and lifestyles, thus contributing to
the exchange of information, tastes, and
experiences. The larger and the more diverse the religious group to which a
woman belongs, the more intensive is her
exposure to diverse informational networks
and flows.

I subdivided the survey respondents
into three categories of religious affiljation—adherents of large and wellrooted urban denominations (the Roman
Catholic and mainline Protestant churches),
members of small churches of Pentecostal bent, commonly known as Zione
(or Zionist, as they are called in Englishspeaking Southern Africa), and women
with no religious affiliation. I expect that
participation in a large denomination
with a culturally diverse membership increases women’s exposure to Westernized
influences and therefore is associated
with a higher likelihood of contraceptive
use. In contrast, religious affiliation is
largely irrelevant to Maputo women’s
material conditions, and I do not expect
to find any influence of it on the intention
to stop childbearing.

Area of residence in the city—The
material constraints of modern urban life,
especially the high costs of living, are
more strongly felt in the city’s central areas than in its more rural-like suburban
fringe. For this analysis, Greater Maputo
is divided into two clusters: one including
the urban core, the so-called cidade de ci-—
mento, or “cement city,” and its immediate periphery, and the other comprising
most of the so-called cidade de canico, or
“reed city.” I expect that residing in the
central section of the city, with its greater
economic and material constraints, positively influences the intention to stop
childbearing. At the same time, Westernized influences are much more intensive

 
 

68 Agadjanian

and pervasive in the central parts of the
city than in the vast semi-rural canico
belt and so is access to contraceptive information and methods. 1 therefore hypothesize that residing in the urban core
has a positive association with contraceptive use.

Duration of residence in the city.—
This variable measures the length of

_, women’s potential exposure to diverse ursban informational flows. While many
‘non—Maputo-born respondents were unable to report the exact year in which they
came to live in the capital, virtually all of
A them could relate the time of their arrival
to the plane crash that ended the life
tof the Mozambican president Samora
coMachel in October of 1986. I use this
event as a watershed for a dichotomous
‘gindicator of the duration of life in the
ity. Based on previous studies of rural‘Oto-urban migration and fertility in sub=Saharan Africa (Brockerhoff, 1994;
©Brockerhoff and Yang, 1994), I hypothe“Ssize that longer life in the city and thereOfore longer exposure to urban informaStional and technological innovations
—increases the likelihood of experimenting
with such a typically urban, Westernorigin resource as contraception. At the
‘osame time, the duration of city life, other
things being equal, should not influence
Asignificantly women’s sense of socioeconomic autonomy-security, and I do not anticipate any significant effect of this variable on the intention to stop childbearing.

I can summarize my hypothesis as follows. First, I expect to find that the predictors that represent mainly women’s socioeconomic autonomy and security—the
number of children, ownership of a radio
set, self-employment, interethnic marital
union, marriage through bridewealth,
polygynous union, coresidence with own

h

1

f

y

lversit

y[U

aded

Social Biology

kin or children only—exert significant effects on the probability of expressing the
intention to stop childbearing. Second, I
propose that the explanatory variables that
describe or represent primarily women’s
exposure to Westernized informational resources and exchanges—duration of residence in Maputo, salaried employment,
use of Portuguese, nuclear household, and
religious affiliation—significantly influence the probability of contraceptive use.
Finally, I suggest the predictors that reflect both the socioeconomic and informational dimensions—education and area of
residence—-affect both response variables.

CONTROL VARIABLES

Respondent’s age.—I include respondent’s age, both in linear and quadratic
forms, in the analysis to control for potential differences in perceived ability to
bear children, social appropriateness of
doing so, and number of opportunities to
contracept.

At least one living son.—Evidence
from the Demographic and Health Surveys does not point to any strong preference in the gender composition of children in most sub-Saharan _ societies
(Arnold, 1991). My ethnographic fieldwork in Maputo led me to conclude that
most women ideally wanted an equal
number of sons and daughters, but that
having at least one son was especially important. To account for this potential bias,
I use having or not having at least one living son as the other control variable.

MODELS

The dichotomous formulation of the
response variables warrants employing
logistic regression for multivariate analysis. Two logistic regression models are
therefore constructed and compared: one

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

  

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

predicting the odds of expressing the intention to stop childbearing and the other
predicting the odds of having ever used a
modern contraceptive method. For both
models I use the same set of explanatory
and control variables, because my primary intention is to establish whether the
factors that affect the intention to stop
childbearing do not affect contraceptive
use as much, and vice versa.

The results of the analysis, presented
in the following section, generally supported my expectations, albeit with several noteworthy exceptions. The bivariate
associations between the dependent and
explanatory variables and the results of
the multivariate logistic regression are
presented in Tables 2 and 3, respectively.
I will focus the discussion on the multivariate results and refer to the bivariate
relationships when necessary.

RESULTS

THE INTENTION TO STOP CHILDBEARING

As I expected, the number of children
emerged as a powerful motivation behind
women’s intention to terminate childbearing: its positive effect on the likelihood of
expressing such an intention was strong
and statistically very significant. Also
consistent with my expectations, the multivariate test showed that education had a
Statistically significant positive effect on
the intention to stop childbearing. However, potential stoppers were less educated on average than respondents who
did not express an intention to end their
childbearing (3.5 and 3.8 years of school,
respectively), which was mainly due to
the lower parity of more educated women.

Radio owners had fewer potential stoppers than did women with no radio at

Reproductive Choices 69

home. In the multivariate model, owning a
radio set also showed a significant negative
effect on the intention to stop childbearing.
This finding conforms to my hypothesis
about the relationship between material
conditions and fertility desires, that in a
traditionally pronatalist milieu greater material comfort and security tend to discourage the attempts to end reproduction.

The results for work illustrate the importance of the difference in type of employment. Although salary-earners and
self-employed women had similar percentages of potential stoppers, well above
that of nonworking women, in the multivariate test the gap between salaried employment and not working disappeared,
explained by other variables in the
model. However, the difference between
not working and self-employment weathered the addition of other predictors and
came out statistically significant. This result confirms my expectations. As I proposed, self-employed women-—mainly
market, street, or home vendors—are, in
general, more economically independent
than nonworking women but, at the same
time, are pushed into the labor force by
dire necessity. Such women usually carry
a greater share of individual responsibility for child care and may feel particularly insecure, both of which tend to depress reproductive intentions.

Contrary to my prediction, the ethnic
composition of the marital union did not
show any association with the intention
to stop childbearing at either bivariate or
multivariate levels. The composition of
interethnic unions in Maputo may provide some explanation of this result.
Most such unions involve representatives
of historically and culturally close (albeit
linguistically often distinct) ethnic groups
of the south, and one may argue that the

 

 
 

 

 

70 Agadjanian Social Biology
TABLE 2
BIVARIATE ASSOCIATION WITH THE INTENTION TO STOP CHILDBEARING AND WITH CONTRACEPTIVE USE
Wants No More Ever
Explanatory Variable Children Contracepted
Number of living children (mean, $.d.) ............csccssccesreeseseesees 4.8 (1.9) 3.8 (1.7)
Completed years of education (mean, 8.0.) ......csceccessseeeeeseees 3.5 (2.9) 4.9 (2.7)
Radio ownership (per cent)
BGisehOld OwiS ATAG1O .cnaneccnsavenanenroexansmsmanerexensenecaaney 41.0 32.4
Household owns n0 radio .........eesscseeecesseseeeeceseceseseeseoeeeees 47.8 21.9
Work for income (per cent)
Does not work for inCOME .........cecssseseseecesteseesenseessnseenereens 39.1 27.7
pe, SeleriplOyed ccs caesarean ancmnsimmnpeaeneaneec 50.1 225
= Works for a wage OF Salary sccsssencuss osssuncsscrcsuuonsrsersaunasees 53.0 66.7
CEthnic composition of marital union (per cent)
® Same native tongue as husband’s ...,......ccseceseccessceseeeesesees 42.5 23.7
2 Not same native tongue as husband’s ........c..csessesssssessessossees 42.9 35.7
SBridewealth status of marital union (per cent)
D Bridewealth paid... .cescsecesccstseceesecssscceseesssceseneteeeseees 43.0 28.9
Bridewealth mot paid... .esceesssssessesescneceeceeeeeseeseseneeess 42.2 30.9
2Monogamous or polygynous union (per cent)
bm MOTOR RTOS iiss cxcernetiviencxrssicsnereenth ¥iennenditinerntoHrenb isi eoeen Te 40.1 30.0
ST Poly gynOUs ..ccccssccssssescecsssecsovesssssseesssesseesscessesseesneseusecsueenees 51.1 29.1
Type of coresidence (per cent)
 Coresides with affines only .0..........ccsccssssenesecseerccensseeenseenee 33.8 26.2
= Coresides with husband, and children only...............::-seeee 46.8 30.6
S Coresides with own kin or children only..............:cscceeceseeeee 51.5 35.4
=U se of the Portuguese language (per cent)
2 Does not use Portuguese.......cccccccssescscsecssersecetcersssseeeseceees 45.1 13.9
= Uses POrUPUESS OCCASIONAL seccncecesmeremememencenanesansas 39.6 35.2
S Uses mainly/only Portuguese .........ceesesessecssesesteetsesesssneenees 47.0 52.6
>Religious affiliation (per cent)
7m Big CHUPCH OF PELIPION,,...0ssiscp...csssisrnceisssigenrsiasescenisveannanastss 45.1 38.7
D HA, Zrcmest (2 raree) CHUN cassewasscanmexansccnanennaeaennnmancnnssamnvnmsansn 38.5 19.7
:= No religious affiliatiom..............ccesssscesccesscessceecseneteerenseneeees 42.5 21.6
Area of residence (per cent)
Lives in. a. central area.......ssiss.escssissnesereisisserseetsviicocedttsicenetds 46.3 34.5
<<) Lives {1.4 peripheral ate scsrescassccsanescsoncrsaesaseseanencaseas 39.7 26.1
"ZDuration of residence in Maputo (per cent)
"SZ Lived in Maputo before 10/1986..........sercs-cesseccsssseecsseesees 45.3 34.7
© In-migrated to Maputo after 10/1986 ...........sessessessesenseees 33.3 12.3
c
Total SAMIPLE (PO COM ccoccomnescmancervscncunssnenoavomenvncwemnensseenene . 42.7 29.8
A

differences between homogamous and
heterogamous marriages in such a context should not be strong.

Nor did this analysis confirm my expectation that bridewealth, by restricting
women’s autonomy and enhancing their
traditional sense of security, would discourage them from seeking an end to
their reproductive careers. In contrast to

interethnic marriage and bridewealth, being in a polygynous union did appear to
increase women’s penchant for fertility
limitation. Supporting my hypothesis
about greater vulnerability of urban
women married to polygynous men and
its effect on these women’s reproductive
plans, respondents in polygynous unions
had a higher percentage of potential stop
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

 

Reproductive Choices 71

TABLE 3

LOGISTIC REGRESSION ANALYSIS OF THE INTENTION TO STOP CHILDBEARING AND OF CONTRACEPTIVE USE
(Opps Ratios)

Variables

Number of children ...........cccccesccccssosscecccccssccsessesscesssseece

Education ..........ccccccsccsssssessccscscsssscserccrsesscssercensasessvereneee

OWMNS A LAGIO........... cess eecesesceseecccccsceccesccuscrscecesuscsceenseees

Does not WOK ........ccsccscerssscessersecseeetecssessceseaseeneesensesasees
Self-employed... eeesesesessesserseetecessessettseseesesteetonease
Works for a wage OF Salary .........scsesceesceseseeseeseeseserees

SAIMIG TALVE CONE UG rcconemmsecensmmanemnmanenaees

Bridewealth paid .........cssesscsssecsssessessssssanessesseencerseeeseeees

POlygyMOuS MaLrlaZe .......ceseesecscetssessseseersesessersenseeese

Coresides with affine .............ccccccsessecsscnssssesccesesoescesense

Coresides with Own Kin ..........ccccccccsesseccccececesccescenscnacese

Husband and children only ............csccssccsceeessesseereassees

NO Portuguese USE .........-scessecsecessesseescatessenscencanseseeecees
Some Portuguese USC .........csscsscscssesccsscsseseeseessesseesansacs
Mainly/only Portuguese USE .........scsscssssssereeesesserenseeees

APG SQUATCE cn cses.ngcewscens.ccwswncin sananaens{eccsenqaghtishnegefEbbStbeees

HaS MO SONSS.....cceecesecccccccccceccesesesssccccsssseccesscetceceeteesensece

Cases? .......ccccccsssccsesssssscrsesscesstesscessssceseccsscearenscesecseceeres

%9<0.01.

’p<0.05.

“Last child excluded for contraception.
‘Fifteen cases with missing data excluded.

pers than those in monogamous unions.
When other variables were controlled in
the multivariate test, the polygynous status of current marriage tended to increase
significantly the odds of wanting no more
children.

Conforming to the image of traditional
dependency-security, women who only
lived with their affines had fewer poten
Wants No More Ever
Children Contracepted
1.882 1.04
1.154 1.144
0.845 1.02
1.00 1.00
0.794 0.84°
0.95 1.40°
1.01 0.94
0.94 0.98
1.274 1.23°
1.00 1.00
1.274 1.14
1.11 1.20°
1.00 1.00
1.09 1.234
1.452 1.572
1.00 1.00
0.88 0.794
1.08 0.734
1.16? 1.15?
1.01 0.612
0.81 1.522
1.019 0.992
0.704 0.84°
3.32 8.072
1579.43 1566.55
1,570 1,570

tial stoppers than respondents who either
coresided with their own relatives or children only, or coresided with their husbands and children only. I hypothesized
that the situation of women coresiding
with their own relatives or children only
was particularly unstable and should
translate into a stronger inclination to
fertility limitation. The multivariate test

 
 

72 Agadjanian

confirmed this hypothesis, that is, that living with own kin or children only significantly raised the probability of the stopping intention compared to coresidence
with affines. Urban married women who
live with their relatives rarely do so by
choice. In today’s urban society it usually
happens when their marital unions are
nominal or fractured, their partners are not
_ supportive, and sharing the roof with kin
= often becomes the only way to survive.
S The association of daily use of Por‘tuguese with the intention to stop childSbearing deviated somewhat from what I
Aanticipated. Respondents who used Portuguese only occasionally had a lower
‘proportion of potential stoppers than both
cothe women who used mainly/only Porstuguese and those who did not use it at
‘gall. When the two greater-use categories
.covere Compared to not using in the multi“Svariate test, only the mainly/only Por=tuguese use category showed a strong and
ostatistically significant positive effect on
“athe intention to stop childbearing. One
way to explain this result is to refine my
<initial conceptual model. At the highest
level of sociocultural integration into urShan society, here represented by the predominant use of the official language,
both material aspirations and cultural
Epreferences are radically different than at
Gits lowest level. Using mainly or only
Portuguese in the context of Maputo connotes both higher requirements for material quality of life (including the quality of
children) and more Westernized cultural
tastes. Thus, at this height of urban sophistication, both material ambitions and
Westernized tastes work together to depress reproductive desires.
As IJ expected, religious affiliation did
not have any net impact on the intention
to stop childbearing. The variation in the

1ver

U

Social Biology

share of potential stoppers across the
three categories of religious affiliation
showed an unclear pattern and disappeared once other variables -were controlled. In accordance with my argument,
women living in those areas were somewhat more likely to express the intention
to stop childbearing than women from
the city’s outer fringe. My hypothesis
also withstood the multivariate test. Residing in the central part of the city significantly increased the likelihood of
wanting no more children compared to
living in its semi-rural suburbs. Finally,
women who lived in Maputo for more
then seven years were more likely to express the intention to stop childbearing
than more recent arrivals, but as I anticipated, no statistically significant effect of
the time spent in the city on the likelihood of expressing this intention could
be found in the multivariate test.

CONTRACEPTIVE USE

In contrast to the previous model and
as I expected, number of children did not
influence the likelihood of having used a
modern contraceptive use. Apparently, contraceptive use in that context was parityindependent, and therefore material constraints associated with the number of
children had little relevance to contraception. Also in line with my expectations
and with findings of countless demographic studies, formal education had a
strong positive effect on the likelihood of
having used contraception. In fact, the
magnitude of this effect was similar to
that of the stopping intention model. The
role of schooling is so potent and vast
that it should not be associated with
solely the socioeconomic or informational sides of reproductive life; it is truly
germane to both. |

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

As I expected, ownership of a radio
proved unrelated to contraceptive experience in the multivariate test, despite the
fact that there were noticeably more evercontraceptors among women with a radio. Since practically all modern contraceptives were available in Maputo free of
charge, pecuniary costs of contraception
were negligible, at least in comparison
with its informational costs.

The analysis detected a remarkable
pattern of association between type of
work and contraceptive use that was
quite distinct from the case of the intention to stop childbearing. Respondents
who worked for a wage or salary had a
much larger share of ever-contraceptors
than the rest of the sample, whereas selfemployed respondents were less experienced in contraceptive use than even
nonworking women. The results of the
multivariate test confirmed my expectations regarding salaried employment, this
most Westernized type of labor force participation. It exerted a strong positive influence on the likelihood of having ever
contracepted in comparison with not
working. At the same time and unexpectedly, self-employment showed a significant negative effect on the probability
of contraceptive use. Although no definite explanation of this finding is readily
acceptable, I can suggest that selfemployed women—mainly market, street,
or home vendors—may represent one of
the least Westernized segments of the
city’s female population, largely untouched by such cultural and technological innovations as modern contraception.

As in the case of the intention to stop
childbearing, but this time in line with
my expectations, no net effect of interethnic union on contraceptive use was
present. Although the share of ever
Reproductive Choices 73

contraceptors was considerably lower
among endogamously married respondents than among respondents whose
husbands were of a different ethnolinguistic stock, the multivariate test showed
that other variables accounted for this imbalance. In sum, it seems plausible to
suggest that in urban society the ethnic
composition of the union is not a major
factor in women’s reproduction-related
aspirations and actions. Also supporting
my hypothesis, no effect of lobolo payments on contraceptive experience was
present. Here again, I am inclined to suggest that women’s reproduction-related
aspirations and actions are largely independent from the degree of the formalization of the marital union. This suggestion, however, does not necessarily
contradict the cross-national evidence of
higher fertility rates in more formalized
unions (Burch, 1983; Preston, 1986).

A statistically significant positive assoCiation between having used contraceptives and being in a polygynous union is
probably the most puzzling finding from
the standpoint of my theory. It ostensibly
contradicts the conceptualization of moderm contraception as an informationally
sophisticated, Westernized practice, for
polygyny does not usually connote greater
access to Westernized informational and
cultural resources. Perhaps the increasing
insecurity that polygyny implies in the urban milieu speeds up women’s contraceptive “education”? This explanation would
provide another bridge between the two
dimensions—socioeconomic and informational—that I outlined earlier. It is also
possible, however, that polygynous men
who feel well insured against the “misfortune” of having insufficient offspring are
more likely to tolerate and even encourage
their wives’ contraceptive use.

 

 
 

 

74 Agadjanian

The detected relationship between type
of coresidence and contraceptive use was
in agreement with my expectations. The
proportion of ever-contraceptors was highest among women coresiding with their
relatives or with their children only and
lowest among those who lived with their
affines. In the multivariate model, however, only living in a nuclear household

had a significant positive effect on the
=probability of contraceptive use relative to
“coresiding with the husband’s kin. Thus,
Sas I hypothesized, the most Westernized
otype of coresidence is associated with the
AWestern-origin practice of modern concotraception.
t Unlike the U-shape pattern of the bicivariate association between use of Por“=tuguese and the intention to stop childrabearing, the proportion of women who
Smreported having ever used modern contra“Sceptives increased considerably at each
2subsequent level of Portuguese use. In
Cthe multivariate test, the effect was also
> . _—— 5
stronger than in the stopping intention
omodel. Both using Portuguese occasion‘sally and especially using mainly/only
“Portuguese in everyday communication
significantly increased the probability of
“Scontraceptive practice relative to not usSing the official language at all. This result
fully supports my hypothesis and clearly
Aillustrates the importance of the Portuguese language channels for the diffusion and exchange of innovative cultural
and technological information.

As I expected, contraceptive experience demonstrated a strong association
with religious affiliation. The shares of
ever-contraceptors among Zionists and
nonaffiliated women were much below
that among the members of mainstream
urban churches. This pattern persisted in
the multivariate test. Membership in a

vers

y{[U

Social Biology

large church had a significant positive
impact on the probability of having contracepted compared to being a Zione or
having no church affiliation at all. It is
unlikely that adherents of large, wellestablished denominations draw inspiration for birth control from church services. At least Catholics—who constituted almost one-third of those who
belonged to mainstream churches—
surely do not. Nonetheless, the Catholics’
share of ever-contraceptors was much
larger than the survey sample average
(42.7 vs. 29.8 per cent). On the other
hand, the contraceptive disadvantage of
Zione women cannot be directly linked to
their religious beliefs, because fertility
control is usually ignored in the Zionist
theological discourse. But even if the
contraceptive message does not come directly from the pulpit, women from wellrooted urban churches avail themselves
of more and more diverse channels of information networking—both inside and
outside of their congregations—and thus
have greater exposure to reproductionrelated informational exchanges than do
women with no access to such networks.

The association between area of residence and contraceptive use was also as
I anticipated. The proportion of evercontraceptors was larger among women
living in the city core, and in the multivariate test residing in the central part
significantly increased the chances of
having used modern contraceptives.
Women who live in the central section of
Maputo are exposed to more intensive,
dense, and diverse informational and cultural influences; they are better informed
about modern contraception and are more
willing to try it. .

Unlike the stopping intention model
and in conformity with my expectation,

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

duration of residence in Maputo had a
very strong effect on contraception. The
proportion of ever-contraceptors among
after-1986 arrivals was extremely small,
and having lived less than seven years in
Maputo impressively decreased the likelihood of prior contraceptive use in the
multivariate test. Apparently, the length
of exposure and access to Westernized
cultural and informational alternatives
and to the infrastructural puissance of the
urban family planning machine play an
important role in shaping the desire for
contraception. This finding is especially
true for a country in which most rural
family planning clinics, where they ever
existed, were destroyed during the civil
war.

SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

In conceptualizing women’s intention
to stop childbearing and their contraceptive use as indicators of urban reproductive change, I proposed that both indicators similarly reflect a shift from
pronatalist or non-interference reproductive behavior toward fertility limitation,
but that they may also account for two
different, albeit interrelated, types of constraints and resources—socioeconomic
autonomy and security and access to
Westernized cultural and technological
information. The foregoing analysis lent
considerable support to this conceptual
schema.

The association of the response variables with educational attainment provides the most conspicuous illustration of
the connection between fertility desires
and contraceptive use. The statistical effect of education was very similar in both
cases. Education both helps women
reevaluate their household and reproductive roles and facilitates their access to

 

 

Reproductive Choices 75

cultural innovations. But what lies beyond education? The variance that education leaves unexplained may indeed be of
a different nature in each case.

Thus, the number of children, a key
biosocial parameter but a poor measure
of informational Westernization, explained much of the variation in the intention to stop childbearing, but was
practically irrelevant to contraceptive use.
Material assets, represented by radio
ownership, affected only the intention
to stop childbearing. Type of employment
in general corroborated my theoretical
premise. Self-employment, which in many
cases meant self-reliance, was a powerful
factor in lowering the ceiling of desired
fertility. In contrast, working in a formal
(salaried) sector environment, which is
generally more collectivized and therefore more propitious to intensive informational exchanges, had a positive effect
on contraceptive use. Coresidence with
the woman’s own kin or with children
only, a usual sign of social and economic
insecurity, had a strong positive impact
on the intention to stop childbearing. On
the other hand, a nuclear two-parent
household, a more Westernized deviation
from the traditional patrilocal arrangement, was more conducive to the acceptance of the Westernized practice of contraception. Participation in larger and
more diverse informational networks represented by membership in large, wellestablished religious congregations ensured a contraceptive advantage but did
not affect the intention to end childbearing. The area of residence and the socioeconomic and cultural environment it
represents proved pertinent to both dimensions and affected both response
variables. The duration of life in the city
and therefore the length of exposure to

 
 

 

 

76 Agadjanian

urban reproductive innovations was as
important for contraception as it was irrelevant for the intention to stop childbearing.

In some cases the hypothesized difference between the two dimensions was
not confirmed. Notably, the polygynous
union not only significantly enhanced
the desire for no more children but also

, Positively affected the probability of con= traceptive use, thus indicating how the exa _, treme insecurity can “substitute” or com2 plement the mechanism of information
® diffusion. Unexpectedly, self-employment
A decreased the likelihood of having contra%© cepted compared to not working outside
t- the home. And the use of Portuguese, an
co unmistakable mark of the degree of
= integration into urban society, proved
5 "= pertinent both to the ceiling of desired
So fertility and to access to informationally
3 and technologically complex forms of
= fertility regulation, even though it showed
S a stronger link with the latter. Obviously,
s real-life reproductive choices are too
© complex to fit perfectly into a simple
‘= two-element scheme; they follow various
—pathways—both alternately or sequen© tially.
3 The detected significant and meaningé ful associations constituted one group of
= = findings; the lack of a clear relationship
la S where it could be anticipated is another
important result. Neither the intention to
stop childbearing nor contraceptive use
was affected by the ethnic composition of
the marital union, suggesting that ethnic
endogamy does not exert any appreciable
influence on reproductive dynamics in
that particular context. Likewise, the
bridewealth status of marriage did not
have any effect on either of the response
variables, which may imply that the relevance of this institution to reproduc
 

a

Social Biology

tion—to both its socioeconomic and infocultural sides—is diminishing. If these
findings are substantively correct, they
may have broad implications for the vision of social and demographic change in
sub-Saharan societies. Seemingly archaic
and irrelevant social forms can successfully coexist with Westernization and
thus persist for much longer than the “rational” logic of development might suggest. Such coexistence is found not only
in Africa or other developing regions but
also in the West’s own historical backyard. The curious fact of modern Western
society is not the decline of monogamous
marriage, childbearing, or religion, but
the very survival of these “obsolete” institutions (Ogburn, 1922; Schneider and
Schneider, 1992).

This comparison of the intention to
have no additional children with the use
of modern contraceptives in relation to
selected sociodemographic and cultural
characteristics should not obfuscate the
broader causal connection between demand for children and contraception.
Demand for children—their number,
spacing, composition, and quality—is
the principal engine of fertility change
(Pritchett, 1994). This engine, however,
functions differently, depending on what
social fuel it uses. Women of distinct
backgrounds and characteristics may articulate and pursue their fertility desires
in differing ways and with differing persistence. As this study suggests, women
with greater access to or acquaintance
with Westernized informational and cultural resources are more likely to use effective contraception and hence possess
an effective instrument for realizing their
fertility desires.

It is important to note that the use of
modern contraception among Maputo

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

women, as well as among women in
other parts of sub-Saharan Africa, does
not necessarily connote fertility limitation or even delaying pregnancy beyond
the traditionally prescribed norm. Everywhere on the subcontinent women often
use Western contraceptives for spacing
births as a substitute for traditional prolonged postpartum abstinence but with no
intention to reduce the final number of
children (Ont and McCarthy, 1986; Caldwell and Caldwell, 1987; Caldwell et al.,
1992; National Research Council, 19935).
One recent study in rural Gambia has
even concluded that modern Western contraceptive technology successfully blends
with the traditional, largely natural, fertility regime (Bledsoe et al., 1994).

This evidence from different subSaharan settings provides an interesting
and instructive illustration of how a
seemingly more sophisticated practice,
both informationally and technologically,
like Western contraception, can proliferate much faster than a simple-to-formulate but culturally hard-to-accept goal of
having a small family. Indeed, contraception, like any innovative information and
technology, may be more difficult to
learn, but easier to legitimize than such a
fundamental revision of the traditional
normative code as fertility limitation. In
this sense, the “new type of fertility transition” in some parts of the subcontinent
(Caldwell et al., 1992) may be a result of
a relatively wide availability of effective
contraceptives that precedes a radical societal reassessment of the value of reproductive investment.

However, this study warns against any
“traditionalization” of modern contraceptive practices. As I observed, the use of
modern contraceptives in Maputo was
generally associated with greater involve
Reproductive Choices 77

ment in the Westernized urban culture.
The study also suggests that once the legitimization barrier is broken, for many
Maputo women fertility limitation becomes
an obvious means of coping with socioeconomic hardships and uncertainties.

If this finding is correct, we should expect that the confluence of perceived economic costs of childbearing and legitimization of Western contraception in a
place like Maputo will produce dramatic
changes in reproductive behavior and
eventually a rapid decline of fertility levels. Aggressive structural adjustment policies currently underway in Mozambique,
and particularly noticeable in its capital
city, may further precipitate this decline.
Although the reduction of government expenditures on social services such as family planning may result in an increase of
the monetary costs of contraceptives, the
exacerbated perception of the rising costs
of childbearing and the intensified proliferation of Westernized tastes and lifestyle
associated with structural adjustment will
most likely outweigh this increase for the
majority of city denizens.

Of course, Maputo dwellers may not
be representative of all Mozambicans.
The gap in reproductive tastes and contraceptive availability between the capital
city and the rest of the country, especially
the rural areas, is enormous. Even without any systematic and reliable data on
hand, one can conjecture that no sustained fertility change has begun to take
shape among the rural population. However, the significance of Maputo should
not be underestimated—first, because it
contains about one-tenth of the nation’s
population in its immediate sociocultural
orbit, and second, because this orbit is
constantly expanding to encompass more
and more Mozambican women and men.

 

 
 

78 Agadjanian

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I am grateful to the Population Council for
support in conducting this research. I would

Social Biology

also like to thank Rose Weitz and Cecilia
Menjivar for their valuable comments and
suggestions.

REFERENCES

ARNOLD, F. 1991. Sex preferences for children and
its demographic and health implications, p.
249-273. In Proceedings of the demographic
and health survey world conference, Washington, D.C., 5—7 August 1991, Vol. 1.

BLEDSOE, C. H., A. G. HILL, U. D’ ALESSANDRO, and
P, LANGEROCK. 1994. Constructing natural fertility: The use of Western contraceptive technologies in rural Gambia. Pop. Develop. Rev. 20:
81-113.

3 BROCKERHOFF, M. 1994. Fertility and family plan
ning in African cities: The impact of female mi
gration. Population Council Working Papers No.

December 2015

08

A
ow
WwW
2B
=
oO
a
Kd
g
an
Pee
rd
Z
2
ac
3
3

of migration on fertility in sub-Saharan Africa.
Soc. Biol. 41:19-43.

Burcu, T. K. 1983. The impact of forms of family

and sexual unions and dissolution of unions on

fertility, p. 532-567. In R. Bulatao and R. D. Lee

(eds.), Determinants of fertility in developing

countries, Vol. 2. Academic Press, New York.

BURUNDI. 1988, Enquéte démographique et de santé

au Burundi, 1987. Ministére de 1’Interieur,

Gitega, Burundi, and Institute for Resource De
velopment/Westinghouse, Columbia, Maryland.

CALDWELL, J. C., and P. CALDWELL. 1987. The cul
tural context of high fertility in sub-Saharan

Africa. Pop. Develop. Rev, 13:409-437.
ALDWELL, J. C., I. O. ORUBULOYE, and P. CALD
WELL. 1992. Fertility decline in Africa: A new

type of transition? Pop. Develop. Rev. 18:
211-242.

CLIGNET, R. 1967. Environmental change, types of
descent and child rearing practices. Jn H. Miner
(ed.), The city in modern Africa. Praeger, New
York.

. 1970, Many wives, many powers: Authority and power in polygamous families. Northwestern Univ. Press, Evanston, IL.

FRANK, O. 1987. The demand for fertility control
in sub-Saharan Africa. Stud. Fam. Plan. 18:
181-201.

GHANA. 1989. Ghana demographic and health survey, 1988. Ghana Statistical Service, Accra,
Ghana, and Institute for Resource Development/Macro Systems Inc., Columbia, Maryland.

GRAHAM, D. H., I. BAPTISTA LUNDIN DE COLOANE,
A. FRANCISCO, W. NALL, M. WALKER, and
P. Jenkins. 1991. Peri-urban baseline research
results: Maputo Mozambique. Final report to
USAID mission, Maputo, Mozambique. Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH.

] at 13:47

by [University of Michigan

Downloade

 

IstUGO-ABANIHE, U. C. 1994. Reproductive motivation and family-size preferences among Nigerian men. Stud. Fam. Plan. 25:149-161.

JEsEEBHOY, S. J. 1995. Women’s education, autonomy, and reproductive behaviour: Experience
from developing countries. Calderon Press, Oxford.

MonrEAL, T. 1991. Comportamento reprodutivo da
mulher mocgambicana, 1987. Ministério da Saide,
Universidade Eduardo Mondlane, and UNFPA,
Maputo, Mocambique.

Morr, F, L., and S. H. Mott. 1985. Household fertility decisions in West Africa: A comparison of
male and female survey results. Stud. Fam.
Plan. 16:88-99. ;

MuusaM, H. V. 1956. Fertility of polygynous marriages. Pop. Stud. 10:3-16.

NATIONAL DIRECTORATE OF STATISTICS. 1993. Personal
communication of the statisticians of the National
Directorate of Statistics of Mozambique.

NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL. 1993a. Demographic
change in sub-Saharan Africa. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C,

. 1993b. Factors affecting contraceptive use
in sub-Saharan Africa. National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.

MOSHER, W. D., and C. GOLDSCHEIDER. 1984. Contraceptive patterns of religious and racial groups ~
in the United States, 1955-76: Convergence and
distinctiveness. Stud. Fam. Plan. 15:101-111.

OcBurRN, W. 1922. Social change. W. Huebsch, New
York.

Onl, G. A., and J. McCartuy. 1986. Use of contraceptives for birth spacing in a Nigerian city.
Stud. Fam. Plan. 17:165-171.

OpponG, C. 1983. Women’s roles, opportunity costs
and fertility, p. 547-589. Jn R. Bulatao and R. D.
Lee (eds.), Determinants of fertility in developing countries, Vol. 1. Academic Press, New York.

PeBLey, A. R., and W. MBucua. 1989. Polygyny
and fertility in sub-Saharan Africa. In R.
Lesthaeghe (ed.), Reproduction and social organization in sub-Saharan Africa. Univ. of California Press, Berkeley, CA.

Pison, G. 1986. Démographie de la polygamie.
Population 41:93-1272.

POoLLAK, R. A., and S. C. Watkins. 1993. Cultural and
economic approaches to fertility: Proper marriage
or mésalliance. Pop. Develop. Rev. 19: 467-496.

PRESTON, S. 1986. Changing values and falling
birth rates, p. 176-195. In K. Davis, M. S. Bernstam, and R. Ricardo-Campbell (eds.), Belowreplacement fertility in industrial societies:

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

Causes, consequences, policies. Pop. Develop.
Rev. 12(Suppl.).

PRITCHETT, L. H. 1994. Desired fertility and the impact of population policies. Pop. Develop. Rev.
20:1-~55.

RENNE, E. P. 1993. Gender ideology and fertility
strategies in an Ekiti Yuruba village. Stud. Fam.
Plan, 24:343-353.

REPUBLICA DE MOCAMBIQUE. 1993. Relatério sobre
os resultados finais do inquérito as familias na
cidade de Maputo, Vol. 1. DireccZo Nacional de
Estatistica, Maputo, Mocambique.

. 1995. Mocambique: Panorama demogréfico e sdécioeconémico. Direccio Nacional de
Estatistica, Maputo, Mocambique.

SCHNEIDER, J., and P. SCHNEIDER. 1992. Going forward in reverse gear: culture, economy and po
 

Reproductive Choices

 

  

litical economy in the demographic transition of
a rural Sicilian town. Jn J. R. Gillis, L. A. Tilly,
and D. Levine (eds.), The European experience
of declining fertility, 1850-1970: The quiet revolution. Blackwell, Cambridge, MA.

SHapiro, D., and B. O. TAMBASHE. 1994. The impact of women’s employment and education on
contraceptive use and abortion in Kinshasa,
Zaire. Stud. Fam. Plan. 25:96-111.

Ware, H. 1977. Women’s work and fertility in
Africa, p. 1-34. Jn S. Kupinsky (ed.), The fertility of working women: A synthesis of international research. Praeger, New York.

WEstTorr, C. F, 1990. Reproductive preferences and
fertility rates. Internat. Fam. Plan. Persp. 16:
84-89,

 
