Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

Selective migration from Samoa: A longitudinal
study of pre-migration differences in social and
psychological characteristics

Joel M. Hanna , Maureen H. Fitzgerald , Jay D. Pearson , Alan Howard & JoAnn
Martz Hanna

To cite this article: Joel M. Hanna, Maureen H. Fitzgerald , Jay D. Pearson , Alan Howard

& JoAnn Martz Hanna (1990) Selective migration from Samoa: A longitudinal study of
pre#migration differences in social and psychological characteristics, Social Biology, 37:3-4,
204-214, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1990.9988760

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1990.9988760

 

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal @
alil Article views: 15
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 6 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:43

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

 

Selective Migration from Samoa:
A Longitudinal Study of Pre-migration Differences in
Social and Psychological Characteristics

 

Joel M. Hanna, Maureen H. Fitzgerald, Jay D. Pearson!, Alan Howard,
and JoAnn Martz Hanna

Departments of Physiology and Anthropology
University of Hawaii
Honolulu, Hawaii

ABSTRACT: In 1981 extensive questionnaire and interview data were collected on some 100
young Samoan adults. Five years later in 1986 we determined their whereabouts and divided
the data in accordance with migration status. The answers of the 35 who had migrated in the
intervening period were contrasted to those 65 who remained in Samoa. The migrants differed
in several distinct areas. Migrants reported a higher degree of peer-reliance as a personal
adaptive strategy. Migrants also reported larger numbers of individuals in social support
networks, a higher quality of support and more community involvement. They also report less
expressive display of anger. Those who did not migrate reported a slightly better view of life in
Samoa and abroad, as well as better relations with their friends and neighbors. These findings
support a hypothesis that migrants are pre-selected to fit into migrant communities and do not

appear to be misfits who are unhappy with life in Samoa.

During the latter half of the twentieth
century, American and Western Samoa
have experienced a massive outmigration as native Samoans have participated in a worldwide migratory flow
from rural island villages to urban centers. This movement has led to the establishment of a number of migrant
communities outside of Samoa, especially in urban centers of the United
States and New Zealand (Baker and
Hanna, 1981). Recent census estimates
for the United States (1980) identify
some 41,948 resident Samoans, half living in California and another third living
in Hawaii (Franco, 1985). The remainder have settled mostly in urban areas
on the West Coast. While the absolute
numbers of Samoan migrants are not
impressive when compared to other ethnic migrations in the history of the
United States, they actually represent a
significant proportion of the Samoan

204

 

population. Shankman (1978) estimates
that up to a third of the population of
Western Samoa permanently lives
abroad, and census data indicate that
there are more Samoans living within
the United States than in American Samoa (Franco, 1985). Given the large
numbers permanently living abroad, it is
evident that emigration has become a
critical demographic and economic necessity for Samoa (Shankman, 1978, p.
119).

There have been a variety of studies
of migrant Samoan communities describing the life styles and adaptive
problems associated with the migration
process. Migrant Samoans are similar to
other groups in many respects, but also
show some unique characteristics.
While the processes of social adaptation
manifested by Samoan migrants paral
1Present address: NIA Gerontology Research
Center, Baltimore, MD.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 37, No. 3-4

lel those of other ethnic groups (Hull,
1979), Samoans seem to rely on the support of kinsmen to an unusual degree
(Graves and Graves, 1977, 1979). In all
migrant communities studied—New
Zealand (Graves and Graves, 1985),
Hawaii (Hecht et al., 1986), Seattle
(Kotchek, 1978), and California
(Ablon, 1971; Janes, 1986)—there is a
strong post-migration dependence on
the extended family, usually coupled
with participation in a Samoan church.
New arrivals are readily accepted into
existing networks which provide for
their needs and aid their integration into
the host community. The contributions
of kin networks in migrant communities
are pervasive and include providing
funds for leaving Samoa, finding housing and employment in the new locale,
and assisting with the ongoing processes
of dealing with bureaucracies and meeting acute needs in times of shortage or
stress (Graves and Graves, 1978;
Ablon, 1973).

The migrant community may actually
be involved in selection of who will migrate by virtue of their support through
remittances. Nancy Graves (1984) provides data from New Zealand suggesting that two-thirds of Samoan migrants
have their passage paid by the wider extended family, Indeed, MacPherson
(1978) comments that without the extended family Samoan migration would
be nearly impossible; certainly its valume would be greatly reduced. Graves
and Graves (1977, 1978) have noted the
preference of new Samoan migrants for
a kin-reliant adaptive strategy, which
they have described in some detail.
They contrast it with the peer- and selfreliant strategies preferred by other ethnic groups. The latter strategies are
more closely associated with individual
initiative and are less frequently em
Selective Migration from Samoa 205

ployed by Samoan migrants in the early
stages. The combination of family affiliation, church membership, and group
cohesiveness provide the migrant with a
partial buffer against the stresses of a
new and foreign environment. Adaptive
success would be difficult without them.

While kin-based migration is generally beneficial, it is not without problems. Reciprocity within the migrant
community is required for the system to
function, so migrants must be prepared
to give of themselves in the form of remittances to Samoa, hard work on the
job, respect for the traditiona! hierarchy, and service to the local community
(Janes, 1986; MacPherson, 1978). The
material and emotional costs are potentially very high. Hanna and Baker
(1979) and Pawson and Janes (1984)
have suggested that the increment in
blood pressure recorded among some
Samoan migrants may result in part
from burdensome social obligations.
Similarly, Kincade and Yim (1987, p.
76) report that in Hawaii “Samoans as a
group have the highest potential level of
stress of all groups studied. Compared
to other groups (Koreans, Filipinos,
Japanese, and Caucasians) they experienced especially high incidences of
death of spouses, relatives, and close
friends, divorce, and marriage, and
changes in health and behavior of family
members.” Some migrants are motivated to dissociate themselves from the
Samoan community to take advantage
of opportunities to accumulate capital
resources for themselves or their immediate families, and for those who choose
to remain within the community, demands are gradually reduced to the
point that accumulation is possible.
MacPherson (1978, pp. 11-16) estimates the process takes about five years.
This is accompanied by a change in per
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

206

sonal adaptive strategy toward either
peer- or self-reliance.

Thus, many facets of the Samoan migration process are known. Some of the
salient features are as follows: (a) a major portion of the Samoan community
lives abroad; (5) the migration process
relies heavily upon the extended family,
and integration into an extant overseas
community through church membership and adherence to traditional pat
_ terns of social obligation; (c) social net
works are active in all stages of the
migration process from the selection of
migrants to their integration into the
host community.

Given the large social investment in
the migration process, there is an important question to be answered, the one
we address in this report: Do those individuals who migrate abroad differ in any
significant manner from those who re
‘main in Samoa? There is reason to be
lieve that they do. It is possible that migrants are primarily drawn from among
those who are most disaffected at home.
The argument would be that disaffected
individuals—those least well-adjusted
to the Samoan way of life—would be
more motivated to leave their home
communities than those who are welladjusted. A case could also be made for
the alternative possibility. Here the argument would be that those who were
well-adjusted in Samoa would be more
likely to migrate because they would be
chosen more frequently by overseas
sponsors. A corollary to the first argument would be that migrants are drawn
from the most self-reliant individuals in
Samoa; a coroilary to the second argument is that they are drawn from individuals who are largely family- or kinreliant. The research cited above would
seem to favor the pre-selection of kinreliant individuals. We found a unique

Hannaet al.

 

Social Biology

opportunity to investigate this question
as part of our continuing research concerning Samoan migration and health.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

In 1981 we undertook a survey of the
seven villages in American Samoa
which have provided the largest number
of migrants to the State of Hawaii, as determined by our earlier surveys (Baker
and Hanna, 1981). Some 102 young men
and women living in those villages at
that time were identified and interviewed in the hope that we could return
in several years and compare the responses of those who migrated to those
who did not. We were able to return in
1986—five years later—and establish
the whereabouts of 100 of the original
sample. During the intervening five
years, 35 had migrated to the United
States, New Zealand, or Western Samoa; 65 remained in American Samoa,
and one was deceased. We could not determine the whereabouts of one individual. This report will contrast the responses of those who migrated with the
responses of those who did not. Table 1
summarizes some of the social characteristics of the 87 individuals whose data
was adequate for this analysis.

Our 1981 survey included body measurements, casual blood pressures, and
extensive interviews. A urine analysis
for determination of stress hormone excretion was also performed (described
by Hanna et al. 1986). Pearson and
Hanna (1989) have discussed the anthropometry, blood pressure and some
of the demographics of the migrants as
compared to non-migrants. They found
that the migrants were younger, less fat,
and had lower blood pressures prior to
moving than non-migrants.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Vol. 37, No. 3-4

TABLE 1

Some CHARACTERISTICS OF MIGRANTS AND
NON-MIGRANTS

Characteristic Non-migrants Migrants
Sex?

Male ............. 34 17
Female ........... 24 12
Mean age (years) .... 19.4 18.0

Married ............ 8 1
Children ........... 8 1
Years of schooling ... 11 11
Languages spoken

English ........... all all

Samoan ........... all all
Church attendance

Frequent .......... 39 19

Seldom sca sana ax i 14 5

Never ..........4. 1 2
Scores on

Tradition index ..... 10 10

SCT ..........005: 4.0 3.5

IMCCED aa a: aeoeas 2 6.7 te

“Numbers of informants who were included in the statistical analysis. This figure represents the numbers upon which
complete data is available and is less than the 35 migrants and
65 non-migrants actually interviewed in 1981.

Among the instruments employed in
1981 were: (1) a brief individual and
family health questionnaire eliciting information about chronic disease, smoking, drinking, and exercise patterns; (2)
an inventory of Major Life Experiences
(MLE) which included information on
work and residential histories, religious
affiliation, decision-making, involvement in Samoan cultural practices,
financial arrangements for saving and
remittance patterns, plans for migration, and aspirations for the future; (3) a
structured interview examining aspects
of Coronary Prone Behavior including
feelings of pressure for achievement
(Dembrowski et al., 1978); (4) a protocol dealing with anger that concerned
stimulus conditions, intensity of feelings
and subsequent coping behaviors; (5) a

 

Selective Migration from Samoa 207

multiple choice test examining knowledge of American middle-class culture
(MCCT) through recognition of institutions and concepts (adapted from Howard, 1974); (6) a Samoan Conceptual
Test examining knowledge of Samoan
cultural concepts (SCT); and (7) a protocol exploring views about life in’Samoa, Hawaii, and California. This protocol focused primarily upon economic
and social perceptions.

The questionnaires generated hundreds of responses to objective and
open-ended questions, which were either coded or subjected to content analysis. To aid in the reduction of this vast
array of information, we created a number of indices which combined data that
were measures of the same variables.
These indices are listed in Table 2.

Another of the indices concerned
adaptive strategies. The specific questions and possible responses are presented in the Table 3. The approach follows that of Graves and Graves (1977,
1979), but some questions were altered
to be more appropriate for the present
sample. In their study of Samoan immigrants to New Zealand, Graves and
Graves asked questions related to occupation, job-seeking behavior, and living
arrangements. Our sample was younger, largely unemployed, and nonmigrant, so we focused instead on daily
life situations. Paralleling the Graves’
study, the three categories of personal
adaptive strategy were kin (family),
peer (friends) and self. A score was derived in each category for each subject in
the study. The potential range was different for each category, since some
questions allowed only two alternatives
while others permitted multiple responses. Thus some questions discriminated only between family and friends,
while others discriminated only between

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

 

208 Hanna et al. Social Biology

TABLE 2
INDICES AND COMPONENTS
Index Composition

AMBITION ............--.0005- An index rating the individual’s aspirations for future achievement. Scores from 0 to 4.

ANTISOCANG ..,............-- Degree of antisocial behavior response to anger (0 to 4).

ASKHELPNO ac ssc ce nna os wean Number of people named as supports from whom ego would
not seek help (0 to 4).

ASKHELPYES ...........0-0005 Number of people named as supports from whom ego would
seek help (0 to 4).

BORROWNO ............00006- Number of people named as supports from whom ego would
not borrow money (0 to 4).

ALAIN «amas oo 2c onmus on anaes Index of perceptions of life in California. 24 points ranging
from 12 (unfavorable) to 24 (favorable).

COMMUNITY .............60-- Index of involvement in local community, including number of

organizations, position as officer, number of communitybased activities (0 to 11).

COMPETE, cscs sus veces wana uns Self report of competitiveness from CPB structured interview
(0 to 8).

DENSITY is cacewnd ta naenoes ens Sum of frequency (0= yearly to 3 = daily) of interaction multiplied by number of named supports (range from 0 to 45).

DENYANG .......... cece eee Degree of denial affect response to anger (0 to 12).

DISCUSANG ...........000 eee Degree of discussion behavior response to anger (0 to 10).

DISPANG ............. cece eens Degree of displacement behavior response to anger (0 to 6).

EXPRESSANG ox ox ae comes an aume Degree of expressive affect response to anger (0 to 11).

FAMELYRELY ................ Index of the locus of reliance either family or self (0 to 16).

FEELPRES ..............0e000- Intensity of pressure felt during daily activities, a measure of
coronary prone behavior from the CPB (0 to 7).

FINANCE ........... eee eee eee Index of financial arrangements describing giving and receiving of money between ego, family, and friends (0 to 4).

GIVEHELPNO ...............+. Number of individuals named as supports would not help (0 to
15).

GIVEHELPYES ................ Number of individuals named as supports would help (0 to
12).

HAWAIIVIEW ..........0. 0 cee Index of perceptions of life in Hawaii (24 points ranging from
12 to 24).

INAFFECTANG ............05- Degree of inhibitory affect response to anger (0 to 12).

INHIBANG ..........-.00eeeeee Degree of inhibition behavioral response to anger (0 to 11).

INTENANG  gacicscxcvinns 00 asm Intensity of anger—sum of the intensity of perceived anger
resulting from several classes of situations indices (0 to 11).

JOBIND ........ cece cree ee cerns Index of job seeking behavior including present employment

status, expectations for future employment, working history,
and parents’ working history (0 to 4).

LENDNO os seegsas ay pamaey ...-. | Number of listed supports ego would not lend money (0 to
15).

LENDYES ...-.cseeeeeeees »+e++ Number of listed supports ego would lend money (0 to 12).

MCCT 4 epee oun 4484 BE FERE TTrre Sum of correct answers on Middle Class Conceptual Test (0 to
24).

MOVEIND .......ss cere reece Sum of number of past moves, number of schools attended,
travel abroad, attendance of schools abroad (12 to 32).

NUMFRSUP ..........-...0 0055 Numbr of friends named as supports (0 to 12).

NUMBHOUSE csc cewes ce canasnn Number of residents in ego’s house (2 to 19).

NUMHSSUP ...............-06- Number of household residents named as supports (0 to 8).

NUMRELSUP ...............-- Number of relatives named as supports (0 to 12).

NUMSUPP ..............--6005: Total number of individuals named as supports (1 to 15).

OTHERRELY «gc ccass ss oa cxnus Index of reliance on others as opposed to self (0 to 4).

PAGOVIEW ........... ee eee Index of perceptions of life on Tutuila (24 points ranging from
12 to 24).

PROTESTANG .............5-: Degree of protest behavior response to anger (0 to 9).

 

 
Vol. 37, No. 3-4 Selective Migration from Samoa 209

 

 

TABLE 2 (continued)
RELFRIEND ..............006- Index of relations with friends and neighbors ranging from
close (0 to 8).
REMITTANCE .............665 Remittance pattern—no exchange (0), to receiving (1), to
giving (2), to giving and receiving (3).
RESPPRIESS «2a ce oa cea nu xe on 09n Index of intensity of response to feelings of pressure, from
CPB structured interview (0 to 6).
RFAMILY ...........00 eee eens Index of relations with family minimal (0) as opposed to
extensive (4).
BCT a+k4 na caress eT Perrrer rece Sum of correct answers on Samoan Conceptual Test (0 to 21).
SENSERESP cs cxcssusse ce scuses Feelings of a sense of responsibility toward others. Taken
from the CPB structured interview (0 to 6).
SUMRELSHS ...............46: Sum of relations with supports living in the same household (6
to 47).
wn TIMEO ... 0... cece cece eee eee Index of time orientation from CPB structured interview (2 to
4 29).
S TRADITION ................-6. Index of orientation toward Samoan tradition, sum of SCT
a score, belief in the power of traditional hierarchy, and mem2 bership in Samoan churches (1 to 40).
= TYPEA 2.2... cece cece eee eee Sum of WORKO, TIMEO, COMPETE indices ranging from
a 3 to 40, representing a continuum from Type A to Type B.
EC ‘VILLAGEVIEW aacusg evan ww ne Index of perceptions of Samoan village life (12 to 24).
= WORKO  ..... cece cee eee Index of work orientation from CPB structured interview (0 to
or 9).
T
Om
= TABLE 3
= CRITERIA FOR PERSONAL ADAPTIVE STRATEGY
oS
= ANSWER CATEGORY
— QUESTIONS Kin Peer Self
2 Who decides for you or
© with whom do you discuss
& — decisions concerning
a Entertainment ..... 0.00. cee e eee eee eens parents/kin friends self
e CHOLeS 0... cee eee eee lect e eee teen neeeeees ” ” ”
‘S Who are friends ............. a4 26 Hoe OR OS » ” ”
, —-— Education ......... ccc cece ec ce eens eeeeeanes ” ”
> JOD oo eee cece eee eee ete nen ee eens ” ” =
5 Where you live ........ 00. cece cece e ee een eee ” ” ”
2 Diaily AGtWEIES «ox os one we on eas we aoawR SRE » ” ”
S Who do you try to please? 2.0... . cece eee ee ees parents TT self
q
5 Whodoyou
A prefertolivelike? ...........0.. cece cece eee kin peers
Are relatives helpful? ......... ccc eee eee eee yes
Are friends helpful? .. 0... 0c ccc eee e eee nee Lae yes
Who helps with problems?
WIth FOlQHVES? casa eg ca semen va sa nee oa aes Be kin friends self
With friends? 2.0... .. cee eee eee eee ee vanes kin friends self
With neighbors? ......... 0. eee eee ees kin friends self
Persons you feel close to? oo... cee cece eee ee ee relatives friends none

 

“Some possible answers included “both friends and family,” so one point was added to each class.

Up to nine persons could be named. One point was given in the appropriate category for each kin or friend named. One point
was given in the self category for each of the nine spaces which remained blank. The final number within each category was totaled
and those in the top third of the category were given an index point. Thus, only those in the top of each category received an index
point for answers on this item.

 

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

210 Hanna etal.

self and family. In contrast, the question
concerning whom respondents ‘“‘felt
close to”’ could include some family,
some friends, or no answer. In this question there was a total of nine possible responses. Some informants filled all
spaces, naming nine individuals, while
others filled in fewer than nine names.
The blank spaces were counted as
“none” (see Table 3 for details). The
final number of responses in each category was summed yielding three category responses rather than one overall
personal adaptive strategy as discussed
by Graves and Graves.

The relationship between personal
adaptive strategy categories was explored by correlational analysis. As
might be anticipated, the self-reliant
strategy showed a significant negative
correlation with the other two categories (—0.65 with kin, —0.30 with peer,
both p<0.05), while peer- and kinreliance did not significantly intercorrelate (0.05). Thus, those favoring a selfreliant strategy were likely to score low
on the two other-oriented strategies;
those empoying peer- and kin-reliant
strategies were less likely to commit exclusively to one or the other.

We performed an analysis of variance on each of the three strategies, with
migration status and gender as independent variables. Gender was included as
an independent variable to account for
possible gender differences in adaptive
strategies (see Graves, 1984). There
were no significant pre-migration differences in the self- or kin-reliant strategies; however, there were significant differences in peer-reliant strategies Migrants show statistically higher
peer-reliant scores (mig=1.7, nonmig = 1.2; F=5.6, 1,83 d.f., p< 0.01, 87
cases). Thus, the premigration difference in personal adaptive strategies was

 

Social Biology

a stronger peer-reliance by those who
subsequently migrated, but no significant difference in self- or kin-reliant
scores.

Additional analysis was performed
using a discriminate function with the
items listed in Table 2 employed as independent discriminating variables. Migration status was the dependent variable. The procedure used was SPSSPC +
with the reduction in unexplained variance (MINRESID) as the criterion. The
goal of the technique was to divide the
two groups on the basis of the independent variables listed in Table 2 with the
criterion being the reduction in unexplained variation (error). This procedure requires a complete set of variables
for each individual. Because some protocols were incomplete, or some questions were not answered, a complete set
of variables was not available for each
individual. Complete data were available on 55 non-migrants and 23 migrants.
The analysis was performed on this sample. The numerical loss from migrants
and non-migrants was approximately
equal.

The discriminant function employed
a pooled data set including males and females. Table 4 summarizes the 12 variables which accounted for 53 per cent of
the variation between migrants and
non-migrants. These variables are derived from all protocols and discriminate in four areas—social support, social relations, anger and responses to
anger, and perceptions of life in various
sites. The migrants reported a greater
number of individuals from whom they
obtain social support and more interaction with them (NUMSUPP and DENSITY). They also reported better relations with their families (RFAMILY),
and more involvement in their communities (COMMUNITY). Although

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Vol. 37, No. 3-4

scoring higher on our competition index
(COMPETE), migrants reported feeling less pressure to _ achieve
(FEELPRES). When angry they reported a higher frequency of protesting
(PROTESTANG) and displacement
(DISPANG, taking anger out on someone other than the one who provoked it)
responses than non-migrants. However,
they reported being less emotionally expressive (EXPRESSANG) of their anger. Migrants also viewed life in both Samoa (PAGOVIEW) and in California
(CALVIEW) slightly less favorably
than non-migrants. They further reported less favorable relations with
friends and neighbors (RFRIEND) The
procedure distinguished migrants from
non-migrants in 83.3 per cent of the
cases,

We additionally examined responses
to five questions specifically related to
anticipated migration. One question directly addressed whether our respondents anticipated migrating or not. If
they did anticipate migrating, they were
asked how certain they were that they
would move in the near future. They
were also asked questions related to
where they would migrate, with whom

 

Selective Migration from Samoa 211

they would live, and why they wanted to
migrate. No differences in expectations
or certainty were found, nor were there
appreciable differences in answers to
the question concerning destinations.
When predicting with whom they would
live, should they leave Samoa, nonmigrants favored parents’ siblings, while
migrants favored their own siblings. The
migrants reported that they were motivated to move to further their own education; non-migrants more often reported wanting to travel abroad in order
to visit relatives.

DISCUSSION

The most important single discriminator (Table 4) for distinguishing between migrants and non-migrants is the
size of social support networks. That
networking is a useful adaptive tool during acculturation and after migration
has been demonstrated. Dressler
(1982), for example, reported that a
larger base of social resources favored
individual coping and adaptation to culture change in the West Indies. Those
without the benefit of larger networks
were more predisposed to illness. Like
TABLE 4
DISCRIMINATING VARIABLES LISTED IN ORDER OF IMPORTANCE

VARIABLE

COMMUNITY ........
DENSITY

oe ovretoesees ss

PROTESTANG
DISPANG
EXPRESSANG ........
RELFRIEND
COMPETE

eevee eerveeeeee

RANK

NUMSUPP ............ 1
2

3

4

5

6

RFAMILY ............ 7
8

9

10

MEAN
NonResipuaL Migrants migrants

0.89 7.3 5.4
0.81 6.0 4.4
0.74 18.0 14.6
0.70 2.6 3.3
0.64 16.8 17.3
0.62 18.2 18.4
0.59 2.7 2.1
0.56 2.5 2.1
0.53 1.7 1.2
0.51 3.1 3.4
0.50 3.9 4.4
0.47 4.0 3.7

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

212 Hannaet al.

wise, Ablon (1971) has emphasized the
critical role played by social networks
for migrant Samoans coping with a disaster in San Francisco. Both Janes and
Pawson (1985) and DuBois (1987)
found larger social networks negatively
associated with health risks in migrant
Samoan communities. The present observations add support and suggest that
there may be a pre-migration selection
criterion favoring the ability to network.

Migrants also apparently had a
higher quality of network available,
defined as the number of supports
named multiplied by the frequency of
interaction (DENSITY). Frequency
codes ranged from 0 for yearly to 3 for
daily interactions. The range of the index was from 2 to 45, the latter representing almost daily interaction with a
large number of supports. Table 4 shows
that the density of the networks is higher
in those who migrated. Some of that
quality may also be manifested in the
higher degree of community involvement (COMMUNITY) by the migrants.

As pointed out above, kin-reliance
has often been pointed to as an important requirement for successful adaptation within Samoan migrant communities, but it does not appear to be a
selective criterion. While family relations (RFAMILY) ts an important discriminator (Table 4), family reliance
(FAMRELY) is not. A possible explanation is that individuals who are peerreliant in Samoa are the best bets for
making a successful adaptation to life in
urban environments, even if they may
become more kin-reliant in the new contexts. In Samoa, peer-reliance may signal the ability of individuals to form strategic relationships with non-kin, a skill
that would have distinct payoffs in migrant communities. Thus, in the short

Social Biology

term, peer-reliant individuals may be
more successful obtaining employment
and interacting with non-Samoans in a
productive manner (Graves and Graves
1977). In the longer term, those who are
successful in building non-kin networks
may be less likely to return prematurely
to Samoa.

It is also noteworthy that peerreliance is independent from kinreliance as seen by their low level of correlation (r = 0.05). This finding seems
particularly significant since either overor under-reliance on kin could prove unsatisfactory to the migrant communityat-large. Highly kin-reliant migrants
could become a burden if their demands
taxed already scarce resources, and they
might also be seen as greater employment risks. That economics is an important criterion in selecting potential migrants among Samoans has been
documented by several ethnographers
(Shankman, 1977; Graves, 1984; MacPherson, 1978). MacPherson describes
a typical dilemma: “ ‘There are three
people waiting to come; we’ve got one
work permit and one room to spare—
who shall we sent it to?’ They were looking for the person who was going to be
the most obedient, the best risk. They
were putting their money on the line and
they wanted a return for their ‘investment,’ not trouble (p. 16).” In this context, obedience means getting a job, retaining a strong cultural identification,
and remaining within the community.
Selection for strong self-reliance, which
is inversely correlated with kin- and
peer-reliance, also involves risk. Selfreliant individuals might have difficulty
fitting into the migrant community,
since independence is counter to basic
Samoan values. Furthermore, given the
demands placed upon migrants for re
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

 

 

 

 

Vol. 37, No. 3-4

ciprocal give and take, self-reliant individuals would be less likely to remain active in the community. Peer-reliance
thus seems an optimal strategy for the
individual and for the community.

There are several important limitations to this study which derive from the
character of the sample. The sample
cannot be considered representative of
older or younger groups, or of migrants
from Western Samoa. Children are
more likely to migrate as part of a family
and probably escape the individual selection criteria we have described.
Middle-aged and elderly migrants are
subject to other criteria with health,
financial support, and family members
living abroad as important components
(Hull, 1979; Holmes, 1978).

An additional limitation results from
the circular nature of Samoan migration
(Janes, 1986; Franco, 1987). Samoans
are extremely mobile and those living
abroad often travel to Samoa (DuBois,
1987). Many migrants permanently return to Samoa after having lived abroad
for several years. Wendt (1972) has described many aspects of this process.
Hard-working couples often aim to retire in Samoa with adequate income to
support a Western lifestyle. Children
born abroad may be sent to Samoa to
learn about Samoa. Finally, there are
those migrants who become disenchanted with life abroad and are motivated to return home. Only the broadest
outline of this process is known, and the
numbers of circular migrants remain obscure (Janes, 1986). We do not believe
that our results hold for all these categories of migrants.

In summary, our analysis supports
the view that migration is a selective
process among young Samoans, that it is
not random for this age group. It further

 

Selective Migration from Samoa 213

appears that the selection process may
include kinsmen abroad and is based
upon a number of social and psychological variables that favor adaptability after
migration. These variables include selection for a stronger peer-reliant adaptive strategy, larger networks of social
support, better relations with family,
and a higher degree of community involvement. Although the migrants did
report a slightly less favorable outlook
on life in Samoa and abroad as well as
less satisfying relations with friends and
neighbors, they appear to have been the
better socialized individuals and possibly were more socially adept. While not
experiencing pressure to achieve, they
nevertheless had personal ambitions fueled by competitiveness and saw migration abroad as a way to gain educational
advantages. In dealing with anger, they
were less likely to engage in expressive
displays than to make direct protests or
redirect (displace) their responses, presumably to more socially acceptable targets. Inshort, they appear to be a betteradjusted segment of this population.
This finding, in turn, suggests that less
well-adjusted individuals are more
likely to remain at home, rather than to
escape their plight through emigration.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank Steve McGarvey,
Julia Hecht, Vanessa Brown, Wade Pendelton, Barbara DuBois, and other members of the 1981 team who collected the data.
We would also like to thank the Government
of American Samoa and the pulenuu and
residents of the villages of Tula, Amouli,
Laulii, Utulei, Fagaalu, Nuuuli, and Vaitogi
for their cooperation. This research was supported in part by NIMH grant MH40675 to
the John A. Burns School of Medicine, the
University of Hawaii.

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

214 Hannaet al.

Social Biology

REFERENCES

ABLON, J. 1971. Retention of cultural values
and differential urban adaptation. Soc.
Forc. 49:385-393.

. 1973. Reactions of Samoan burn patients and families to severe burns. Soc. Sct.
Med. 7:167-178.

Baker, P.T., and J. M. Hanna. 1981. Madernization and the biological fitness of Samoans: A progress report on a research program, p. 14-26. In C. Fleming and I. Prior
(eds.), Migration, adaptation and health in
the Pacific. Epidemiology Unit, Wellington
Hospital, Wellington, New Zealand.

DEMBROWSKI, T.M., S.M. WeElss, J. L.
SuiELps, S. G. Haynes, and M. FEINLEIB.
1978. Coronary prone behavior. SpringerVerlag, New York.

DRESSLER, W. 1982. Hypertension and culture
change: Acculturation and disease in the
West Indies. Redgrave, South Salem, N.Y.

DuBors, B. C. 1987. Hypertension and social
support: The medical anthropology of
older, urban Samoans. Ph.D. dissertation.
Univ. of Hawaii, Honolulu.

Franco, R. 1985. A demographic assessment
of the Samoan employment situation in Hawali. East-West Center, Honolulu.

Graves, N. B. 1985. Adaptation of Polynesian
female migrants in New Zealand, Jn J. Fawcett, S. Khoo, and P. Smith (eds.), p. 365396. Women in the cities of Asia. Westview,
Boulder.

Graves, T. B., and N. B. Graves. 1977. Preferred adaptive strategies. New Zealand J.
Indust. Rel. 2:81-90.

. 1979. Kinship ties and preferred adaptive strategies of urban migrants, p. 195217. In L. Cordell and S. Beekerman, The
versatility of kinship. Academic Press, New
York.

Hanna, J.M., and P.T. Baxer. 1979.
Biocultural correlates to blood pressure of
Samoan immigrants in Hawaii. Hum. Biol.
51:481-497,

Hanna, J. M., G. D. JAMEs, and J. M. Martz.
1986. Hormonal measures of stress, p. 203221. In P. T. Baker, J. M. Hanna, and T. S.
Baker, The Changing Samoans: Behavior
and health in transition. Oxford, New York.

Hecnt, J. A., M. Orins, and C.R. JANEs.
1986. Social settings of contemporary Samoans, p. 39-62. In P.T. Baker, J.M.
Hanna, and T. S. Baker (eds.), The chang
 

 

 

ing Samoans: Behavior and health in transition. Oxford, New York.

Homes, L. D. 1978. Aging and modernization,
p. 11-19. Jn C. MacPherson, B. Shore, and
R. Franco (eds.), New neighbors: Islanders
in adaptation. Santa Cruz Center for Pacific
Studies, University of California, Santa
Cruz.

Howarp, A. 1974. Ain’t no big thing. Univ. of
Hawaii Press, Honolulu.

Hutt, D. 1979. Migration, adaptation, and illness: A review. Soc. Sci. Med. 13:25-36.
Janes, C. R., 1987. Promise and paradox: Migration. Social change and health in an ur
ban Samoan community. Ms.

JANES, C. R. 1987. Promise and paradox: Migration. Social change and health in an urban Samoan community. Ms.

KincalD, D. L., and J.O. Yum. 1982. A comparative study of Korean, Filipino and Samoan immigrants to Hawaii: Socioeconomic consequences. Hum. Org. 46:70~77.

KoTCHEK, L. 1978. Samoans in Seattle, p. 1925. In C. MacPherson, B. Shore, and R.
Franco (eds.) New neighbors: Islanders in
transition. Santa Cruz Center for Pacific
Studies, University of California, Santa
Cruz.

MacPuHerson, C. 1978. Samoan migration to
New Zealand and Polynesian migration and
settlement, p. 11-19. In C. MacPherson, B.
Shore, and R. Franco (eds.), New neighbors: Islanders in adaptation. Santa Cruz
Center for Pacific Studies, University of
California, Santa Cruz.

Pawson, I. G., and C. R. JANES. 1981. Massive
obesity in a migrating population. Amer. J.
Pub. Hlth. 71:508-513.

. 1982. Biocultural risks in longevity: Samoans in California. Soc. Sci. Med. 16:183190,

PEARSON, J. D., andJ. M. Hanna. 1989. Selective migration as a bias in modernization
studies: Premigration differences in morphology and blood pressure among 15-—30year-old American Samoans. Amer. J.
Hum. Biol. 1:263-269.

SHANKMAN, P. 1976. Migration and underdevelopment: The case of Western Samoa.
Westview, Boulder.

WENDT, A. 1973. Sons for the return home.
Longman Paul, Auckland, New Zealand.

 
