Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

The effect of mutations under conditions of
reduced selection

Milford H. Wolpoff

To cite this article: Milford H. Wolpoff (1969) The effect of mutations under conditions of
reduced selection, Social Biology, 16:1, 11-23, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1969.9987795

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1969.9987795

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 11

»
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 16 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:53

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

The Effect of Mutations under Conditions

of Reduced Selection

Milford H. Wolpoff

Department of Anthropology
Case Western Reserve University
Cleveland, Ohio

C. L. Brace has recently formulated a
model of the mechanisms underlying structural reduction under conditions of reduced
or suspended selection. His model consists
of two distinct parts: (1) a consideration of
the most probable effect of genetic mutation
upon the size and form of the related phenotypic structure; and (2) a consideration of
the nature and direction of the non-adaptive
evolutionary change resulting from these
effects in a population.

I propose to review and modify this
model, and to discuss some of the criticisms
leveled against it (Brues, 1966; Bailit and
Friedlaender, 1966; Holloway, 1966; Prout,
1964; Wright, 1964). In addition, I intend to
support the model, as well as the implications of its application for interpreting
hominid evolution. However, it is first necessary to review and clarify the various formulations of Brace’s proposals (1963; 1964a;
Brace and Montagu, 1965) so that the basis
of their modification and defense can be
achieved.

ORIENTED EVOLUTION

Brace originally claimed that his model is
concerned with “reduction of structures
for which the selective importance has

11

 

changed” (1963, p. 39). However, its range
of applicability must be made more specific.
We find it necessary to restrict this range to
structures for which selection has been
reduced (or relaxed). It has long been recognized that such structures exist (Mayr,
1963); vestigial structures represent the
extreme case. I would suggest that the same
model applies to any reduction in selection,
and that vestigial structures are probably
the least important instance.

With reduction of selection, variability of
the structure concerned inevitably increases
(Simpson, 1953, p. 75). Factors responsible
for this increase include both the variability
already present in the gene pool (Mayr,
1963, p. 176), and the accumulation of additional mutation in the gene pool when such
mutation is no longer selected against
(Simpson, 1953, p. 76; Brace and Montagu,
1965, p. 57). Brace’s model proposes that the
accumulation of random mutation will
eventually lead to the reduction and simplification of the structure concerned. There
is some empirical evidence which motivates
this proposition. Vestigial structures, an
extreme result of relaxed selection, are
always smaller and Jess complex than are
their adaptive counterparts (Huxley, 1932;
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

12 Wolpoff

Van Valen, 1960). This reduction and simplification is certainly a possible consequence
of reduced selection. The important question is a necessary, or even frequent, orientation of the nonadaptive evolutionary
change which occurs when selection is
relaxed.

The major set of problems to be considered concern the orientation of evolutionary change when selection is reduced. What,
if not natural selection, orients the direction
of such change? Is such an orientation an
inevitable consequence of reduced selection
(in the same sense that adaptation is an
inevitable consequence of selection [see
Simpson, 1953])? What is the frequency and
evolutionary importance of any observed
orientation?

THE “PROBABLE MUTATION EFFECT”

Brace has proposed that when selection
is reduced, the direction of evolutionary
change is oriented by the structured nature
of genic action. Reduced selection allows a
greater number of mutations to accumulate
in the gene pool, and Brace has developed a
model of genic action in order to predict the
most probable effect of mutations upon the
phenotype. This genic model is motivated by
the observation that most mutations produce a “deleterious” net phenotypic result
(Brace, 1963; Dobzhansky, 1955, 1962;
Fisher, 1930; Stern, 1960; Wright, 1929).
However, the matter is more complex than
this implies (Mayr, 1963, pp. 168-176).
“Deleterious” does not characterize the
effect of mutation upon the phenotype, but
rather characterizes the effect of mutation
upon the relation of the phenotype to the
environment.

It may seem paradoxical that the effect
of a random process—mutation—is nonrandom. However, this apparent paradox is
easily resolved. Mutations are random
changes in the developmental foundation of
a very highly organized and structured
system. For changes in these foundations to

 

Social Biology

be interpretable within such a system, they
must have interpretable, and thus nonrandom, results. Were random mutations not
interpretable within the organism system,
they would not affect the growth and development of the system. We are thus motivated to look for structure and organization in the effects of mutation. We already
have the observation that mutation affects
the relationship between the phenotype and
its environment in a nonrandom (deleterious) manner. We should expect the effect of
mutation upon the phenotype itself to also
be nonrandom. We may also look within
this structured system for the basis of the
orientation of nonadaptive evolutionary
change.

How can we then characterize the actual
morphological, physiological, or behavioral
effect of a genetic mutation upon the phenotypic expression—the so-called “‘trait’’?
In his original formulation, Brace claimed
that the probable result of mutations is the
reduction, simplification, or elimination of
the phenotypic traits developmentally related to the mutated genetic material.
Mutations have the immediate effect of
amino acid substitution or deletion (Ingram,
1957; Jacob and Monod, 1961; Perutz,
1958)—except in those cases when mutation
in a nucleotide triplet leads to a redundantly
equivalent expression of the same information (i.e., amino acid) (Crick, 1966). This
exception accounts, in part, for the observation of seemingly different mutation rates at
different “loci.” Otherwise, amino acid
substitution or deletion will prohibit the
altered protein from performing as it was
coded to do in its developmental chain.
Should this be the case, the chain will either
terminate or continue only in altered form.

Even at this level, the effect of random
mutation is highly structured. Brace contends that the alteration or termination of a
developmental chain will lead to the eventual failure of its phenotypic “result” to develop completely, if at all. Thus, he claims that
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Vol. 16, No. 1

the most probable result of mutation is the
reduction, simplification in complexity, or
elimination of the phenotypic expression in
question. He has termed this phenomenon
the “probable mutation effect.”

When selection for a structure is reduced,
the genetic basis of the structure is left free
to vary and random mutations can accumulate. However, the effect of these mutations
is structured, and it is this structure which
provides the orientation for the direction of
the resultant nonadaptive evolutionary
change.

CRITICISMS RAISED BY BAILIT
AND FRIEDLAENDER

Several authors have criticized portions
of this reasoning. Bailit and Friedlaender
(1966, p. 667-668) make three points in
their discussion of Brace’s model. First,
they point out that reduction, or even
complete termination, could lead to increase, or over-development in the phenotype if the mutated genetic material influences an inhibitory process, This stands in
apparent contrast to Brace’s prediction of
reduction. Jacob and Monod (1961) have
established the existence of genetic bases for
such inhibitory processes. Second, citing
Waddington (1962), they point out that
any significant increase or decrease in a field
system (presumably a result of genetic
mutation) leads to changes in structural
detail as well as changes in structural size.
Lastly, they conclude that ‘‘The accumulation of random mutation... would affect
the final phenotype by causing wide variations in form as well as size”’ (p. 668).

The first criticism raises the question of
inevitability. Is structural reduction an
inevitable consequence of reduced selection?
Brace’s statement is unequivocal: “If the
structure controlled by the locus in question
has no adaptive significance, then it will be
reduced in the course of time” (1963, p. 45).
Perhaps much of the expressed negative
reaction to the model actually represents a

 

Mutations and Reduced Selection 13

reaction to the unequivocal nature of this
particular statement and its implications.
Bailit and Friedlaender have adequately
demonstrated that reduction is indeed not
the inevitable result of alteration or termination in all developmental chains. Even
without their arguments, mutations leading
to structural increase, or to the development of new structures, have long been
recognized. Prout (1964) also questions this
inevitability and its implication of a necessary orientation to nonadaptive evolutionary change. Clearly, then, there seems sufficient reason, both theoretical and empirical,
to rule out so invariant a prediction.

On the other hand, I doubt that mutations which lead to the increase in size or
complexity of a structure under reduced
selection will be, with great regularity,
selectively neutral. Indeed, whether due to
the accumulation of mutations, or the positive effects of selection against increased size
or complexity, or for that matter the selective disadvantage of maintaining an unimportant structure, I suspect that reduction
zs the most likely result of reduced selection.

The second criticism raised by Bailit and
Friedlaender really agrees with Brace’s
conclusion that ‘“‘the structure in question
should be free to vary” (1963, p. 43). The
genic model does predict variation in both
size and detail. There is no conflict between
their conclusions and Brace’s predictions in
this respect.

THE CRUCIAL EVIDENCE

Even though structural reduction is not
an inevitable result of mutation accumulation, no one has questioned its occurrence as
a possible result. The important question is
thus one of significance, rather than one of
existence. It follows that any information
concerning the frequency or evolutionary
importance of structural reduction under
conditions of reduced selection is crucial.
This is precisely what Bailit and Friedlaender have concluded: ‘“‘When it comes to
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

14 Wolpoff

the determinants of alteration in the size or
shape of developing organ systems, or their
component parts, biologists are still very
much at the level of description of empirically observed phenomena” (p. 667). Therefore, our best data consist of experimental
or observational evidence on the frequency
and evolutionary importance of structural
reduction and simplification under conditions of reduced selection. Fortunately, the
literature abounds in such evidence (Breder,
1944; Emerson, 1961; Huxley, 1932, 1942;
deBeer, 1958; Gregory, 1951; Neel and
Post, 1963; Post, 1962a, b, 19632, b, 1964a, b,
1965, 19662, 5; Simpson, 1951, 1953; Tuttle
and Rogers, 1966; Van Valen, 1960).

USE AND USELESSNESS OF
THE MODEL

The model described here deals with the
mechanisms of genic action. Mutations in
the nucleotides of the DNA strand have
highly structured effects upon the resultant
developmental processes. Thus, the ultimate
effects of such mutation upon the phenotypic expression is structured, as is the effect
upon the relation between the phenotype
and its environment. When selection for a
particular structure is reduced, changes in it
are less likely to be selected against and
mutations occurring in, its genetic basis
allowed to accumulate. The structuring of
the effects of mutation provide an orientation to the direction of change of the structure. Reduction in size and complexity is
one of the possible orientations.

From this standpoint, we may best use
this model to describe a mechanism to explain reduction or simplification when it
occurs as a result of reduced selection. 1 would
like to hold this view in contradistinction to
Brace’s original claim that reduction is an
inevitable consequence in structures for
which the selective importance has been
reduced (1963, p. 39).

Perhaps the view suggested here is less
general than that proposed by Brace. I sug
Social Biology

gest two ways in which the model is nof to
be used: (1) Reduction is not an inevitable
result of reduced selection; and (2) reduced
selection is not the unique cause of structural reduction. Holloway (1966) and Prout
(1964) point out the many causes of reduction, as well as the multiple effects of reduced selection, and I am in complete agreement with their observations.

On the other hand, far from rendering the
concept useless, this view allows the use of
the model as a testable explanation of oriented evolutionary change under conditions
of reduced selection. It is from the testability of this more limited hypothesis that its
usefulness is derived. A trend toward structural reduction in a series of fossils is observable, whereas reduced selection in such a
series JS not.

We would like to be able to test which
instances of structural reduction in evolution are due to the accumulation of mutations, and thus are taking place under conditions of reduced selection.

TAUTOLOGICAL OR TESTABLE?

Holloway (1966, p. 10) contends that
Brace’s original application of the model to
historical phenomena is tautological; structural reduction is used as the criterion for
claiming that selection has been reduced,
and then the presence of reduced selection
is used as an explanation of the structural
reduction. Holloway goes on to say: ‘‘We
need guidelines to avoid entanglement
with this possible tautological framework”
(p. 10).

Such guidelines can be, and indeed have
been, developed from this consideration of
the model. It is quite possible to test the
hypothesis that a particular instance of
reduction is the result of reduced selection.

The mode} predicts that when reduction
occurs as a result of reduced selection, there
will be a concomitant increase in the variability of the structure in question. Increased
variability has long been associated with
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Vol, 16, No. I

vestigial structures (Simpson, 1953, p. 75).
The model predicts an increase of variability
associated with any degree of selection relaxation.

For instance, were reduction the result
of selection for reduced size (see Prout, 1964,
pp. 242-243), there would instead be no
concomitant increase in variability. Indeed,
of all the possible mechanisms which can
orient the direction of evolutionary change
(Holloway, 1966; Prout, 1964; Simpson,
1953), only the accumulation of random mutation is accompanied by an increase in
variability.

Therefore, we have a means of testing the
hypothesis that a particular instance of
structural reduction is the result of reduced
selection.

MUTATION BALANCE AND
UNIVERSAL PLEIOTROPY

Some authors have questioned whether a
relaxation in selection will even allow the
accumulation of sufficient mutations in a
population to result in reduction (Prout,
1964; Wright, 1929, 1931). Their arguments
are based on two separate assumptions:
(1) Recurrent forward-backward mutations
will lead to a balance of the alleles concerned, rather than to an eventual loss of
genetic material; and (2) universal pleiotropy never allows selection to actually be
reduced at any particular locus, although it
may be reduced at the level of the phenotype. Let’s take each assumption in turn.

The so-called ‘mutation balance formula” (Li, 1955, pp. 243-244; Prout, 1964,
pp. 246-248; Wright, 1964, p. 131) assumes
a genetic system of two or more alleles, with
recurrent mutations from each allele to each
other. In such a system, each allele is interpretable as a polymorph. However, the
assumption that small mutations on the
level of the DNA base will always lead to an
interpretable change in genetic information
is now open to Serious question.

According to Crick (1966), there are now

 

Mutations and Reduced Selection 15

known to be two normal types of small mutations. On the one hand, there are base
substitution mutations which involve the
changing of one base on the DNA molecule
into another, This type of mutation is reversible, as no genetic material is actually
lost (that is, the position for the original
base is still present, although a different base
occupies it), and the opposite base change
can, and presumably does, occur. Thus, the
base substitution mutation is the DNA
level analogue of the situation which Wright
(1931) mathematically analyzed. Experimental evidence indicates that this type of
mutation will only lead either to an equivalent coding of the same information, or to a
change of no more than one amino acid
(Fraenkel-Conrat, 1964). It is easy to see
why so small a change can often be interpreted as a polymorph on the phenotypic
level.

On the other hand, the second normal
type of mutation, the phase-shift mutation,
involves an addition to, or a deletion from,
the genetic material. The reading of the
genetic message is then thrown “out of
phase.”’ With this type of mutation, a forward-backward mutation balance is much
less likely. The lost genetic material can
only be regained by a phase-shift mutation
of the opposite sort at the same place, either
adding or deleting the same material. Most
phase-shift mutations are “corrected” by
the occurrence of another opposite phaseshift mutation at another place, throwing
the reading of the genetic code back into
phase except for the section between the
two mutations (Crick, 1966). There is, thus,
an excellent chance that any genetic information lost or gained by a phase-shift mutation will remain respectively lost or
gained. However, the extremely low probability of correction at the same place makes
the creation of a forward-backward mutation balance based on phase-shift mutations
extremely unlikely.

Because of the existence of two different
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

16 Wolpoff

types of mutation, it is quite possible that
the genetic material responsible for some aspect of the phenotype which is not being
maintained by selection can actually be lost.
Furthermore, a mutation balance between
the loss and gain of such material is, in many
cases, improbable. Out of phase reading due
to phase-shift mutation is most likely to be
corrected by another phase-shift mutation
at some other point along the DNA molecule. Only the genetic material between the
two mutations remains affected. By limiting
the amount of genetic material affected, the
pleiotropic effects of the change are reduced, if not eliminated. In this manner,
the chances of selection against the mutations are decreased.

The mechanisms whereby genetic material can be irrevocably lost through mutations
are now understood in some detail. When
selection is reduced, an increasing number of
DNA level mutations responsible for reducing or simplifying the trait in question
will not reduce the fitness of the population.
Eventually, such mutations could accumulate in the gene pool until the structure was
either reduced to the point where any further reduction would be selected against, or
until the structure was entirely lost.

Some mutations lead to an increase of
size or complexity, and even to the development of new structures. However, such
mutations have a proportionately low frequency (Jacob and Monod, 1961). Of even
greater importance, increase in size or complexity would probably be disadvantageous,
even in a structure for which selection is
reduced. Thus, there is a good possibility
that mutations leading to an increase in
size or complexity would be selected against.
For this reason, I suggest that in most instances of reduced selection, the prevailing
orientation will be toward reduction of the
structure in question.

In sum, the possibility of mutation balance does not argue against the applicability

Social Biology

of this model, but rather must itself be
viewed with suspicion.

Referring to the question of universal
pleiotropy, several authors have suggested
that selection can never be reduced at any
particular locus because of the pleiotropic
effects which every locus exhibits (Prout,
1964; Wright, 1929, 1931, 1964).

Their argument is based upon the assumption that every locus has at least some
pleiotropic effects. Given this assumption,
certain conclusions can be shown to follow.
Any mutation would have more than one
effect upon the phenotype. If selection were
reduced for the maintenance of a structure,
there would be no reduction of selection for
the genetic basis of the structure, but rather
a shift in the balance of selective pressures
acting upon this genetic material. Selection
could only be relaxed for the genetic material if selection were concomitantly reduced
for the maintenance of all phenotypic
effects of this material. The probability of
reduced selection occurring for all of these
otherwise unrelated structures is close to
zero. Thus, it is concluded that selection can
never be relaxed with respect to the genetic
material, mutations can never accumulate,
and there is no nonadaptive orientation to
evolutionary change. However, there are
reasons to question both the applicability
of this argument and the assumption of
universal pleiotropy upon which it is based.

Even if the existence of such widespread
pleiotropy is assumed, a completely different
argument can be developed from it. As
Brace (19642) has pointed out, a change in
selection acting upon one trait in a pleiotropically connected system can result in
genetic changes which are random with
respect to the other traits in the system.
Thus, when there is any change in the direction or intensity of selection for one trait,
the resultant changes in the genetic material
will affect the other traits in the system in
exactly the same manner as would a muta 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 16, No. 1

tion. Were the selection for one trait relaxed, any change in selection acting upon
the other traits in the system could, through
changes in the common genetic material,
lead to the eventual reduction of the structure in question. On the observational level,
such reduction could not be distinguished
from reduction due to random mutation unless the pleiotropic relations within the system were known. Brace (1964a) has suggested that reduction due to changes in the
genetic material of a pleiotropic system due
to shifts in selecting acting upon the other
traits in the system may well be more common than reduction due to the accumulation
of mutations.

However, an even more damaging point
can be raised against the assumption of
universal pleiotropy itself. As Wright (1929,
p. 227) characterizes universal pleiotropy:
“In general, every given gene has at least
some effect on nearly all parts of the organism.” If this were actually the case, it
would be difficult to see how any change,
adaptive or nonadaptive, could occur at all.

If we interpret Wright’s statement more
loosely, and simply consider the claim that
every unit of genetic material ultimately
influences the expression of more than one
trait, the same problem arises. How could an
adaptive change occur for one structure if
selection acts upon the genetic material
through many structures? Prout (1964) has
made this point in the context of nonadaptive change, but the same arguments apply
to the question of adaptive change. If the
existence of such widespread pleiotropy is
assumed, the chances of a change in the genetic material being advantageous for one
trait, and at the same time not being disadvantageous for all other traits in the pleiotropic system (which, if we take Wright’s
claim literally, is the entire organism) are
nil!

The assumption of pleiotropy for each
genetic unit, even if it is not truly universal,

Mutations and Reduced Selection 17

apparently results in the conclusion that
selection could only rarely lead to an adaptive change for any particular trait. Such a
conclusion bars the possibility of evolution
ever occurring!

The purpose of this discussion is not to
discredit the concept of pleiotropy, for
pleiotropic relations have been often observed and experimentally verified (Dobzhansky, 1955, 1962). I would suggest,
however, that the notion of pleiotropy
cannot be applied to the smallest bits of
meaningful genetic information (nucleotide
bases), but rather must apply only to larger
units. Even a large amount of pleiotropy at
the level of proteins and enzymes does not
necessarily imply a large degree of pleiotropy for the constituent amino acids.
Indeed, we can judge how Uittle pleiotropy
exists at the DNA level by how readily
evolution occurs.

This interpretation allows the possibility
of variation in part of the genetic material
occurring without affecting more than one
part of one trait, and thus describes a system in which evolution can take place.
However, this system also allows the possibility that selection can be reduced, or
even suspended, with respect to some of the
genetic material. Selection permitting, random mutations can indeed accumulate in
the genetic material and orient the direction
of nonadaptive change. In this respect,
the model proposed here has a firm theoretical basis.

EVOLUTIONARY IMPORTANCE
OF PLEIOTROPY

There is, I believe, a great evolutionary
advantage to the development and maintenance of multiple genic effects. This can
be seen from the results of an experiment
recently conducted by Hirsch at the University of Illinois (1963).

Hirsch reported a geotaxic (gravity oriented locomotion) experiment with DroDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

18 Wolpoff

sophila. A strong artificial selection (0.92)
for the ability to distinguish “up” was
applied to the flies. A vertically oriented
two-branch maze with 15 nodes was used.
The optimum response resulted from 15 consecutive upward turns through the maze.
After fifteen generations of selection, the
mean number of upward turns for the selected group was significantly greater than for
the wild population. Selection was then
relaxed, and the mean number of upward
turns for the experimental population returned to the original value in one-third the
time of the experimental selection. Dobzhansky (1967) suggests genetic homeostasis as
the explanation of this rapid return to the
original behavioral phenotype when experimental selection is relaxed.

Other experiments show the same phenomenon for morphological traits (Mather
and Harrison, 1949). In general, when a
population is experimentally exposed to a
severe artificial selective pressure for a particular phenotypic trait, and selection is
then discontinued, the phenotypic trait will
rapidly return to the original condition
(Mayr, 1963). Lerner (1954, p. 174) first
suggested genetic homeostasis as the explanation for this rapid return, defining it as
“the property of the population to equilibrate its genetic composition and to resist
sudden changes.”

This “explanation” itself requires an
explanation (Waddington, 1957; Lewontin,
1957). For instance, Mayr (1963) interprets
the phenomenon in terms of fitness. Because
selection has already led to maximum fitness
in a naturally occurring phenotype, selection for a new phenotype will presumably
change the “integrated genotype” and result in lower fitness. According to Mayr
(1963, p. 288), the lowering of fitness is the
result of “either an accumulation of homozygous recessives or a disharmony between
the newly favored genes and the remainder
of the genotype.” When selection for the
new phenotype is discontinued, natural

Social Biology

selection acts to restore the original optimum fitness.

This explanation raises a number of questions. What allows the homozygous recesSives to accumulate? In what sense are the
newly favored genes in “disharmony” with
the remainder of the genotype? However,
the most puzzling question arises from
Hirsch’s results: How can natural selection
act three times as fast as artificial selection
with an intensity of 0.92?

Rather than viewing genetic homeostasis
as a separate phenomenon and attempting
to discover its underlying mechanisms, I
believe that it can best be explained in terms
of already known mechanisms, as a logical
extension of the pleiotropic nature of much
genetic material and the polygenic background for most phenoypic traits.

When selection acting upon one trait
changes, there are two possible results.
When genetic changes take place in pleiotropic material, the changes are random
with respect to the other pleiotropically
connected traits, and the fitness of the organism will probably be reduced. On the
other hand, if the changed genetic material
is not pleiotropic, no other traits will be
affected. Because not all of the nucleotide
bases are pleiotropic, both possibilities can
occur.

I suggest that in wild populations under
natural conditions with low levels of selection acting upon the organism as a whole,
selection would act against changes in pleiotropic genetic material because of their
overall effect on the organism. Thus, most
adaptive changes are the result of genetic
changes in nonpleiotropic material.

On the other hand, if selection is extreme,
as in the artificial selection of Hirsch’s
geotaxic experiment, changes in the selective value of the organism as defined by the
experiment outweigh any concomitant lowering of fitness resulting from changes in
pleiotropic genetic material. Thus, under
conditions of intense artificial selection for
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Vol. 16, No. 1

only a few traits, advantageous changes can
occur in all the genetic material. When such
selection is relaxed, selection for the pleiotropically connected traits should act to
increase the fitness to its original level,
reestablishing the original gene frequencies
and phenotypic form of the trait in question.
The later selection should be rapid because
it acts through many traits.

Selection, then, acts only to affect pleiotropic genetic material under artificial
laboratory conditions where only a few
traits, rather than the entire organism, defines the direction and intensity of the selective process. I suggest that genetic homeostasis is a laboratory artifact and would
only be rarely observed in wild populations.
It is, rather, the effects of pleiotropy which
protect the population from the short-term
effects of vacillating changes in selection.
I believe that this function is the fundamental evolutionary importance of plei
otropy.

PLEIOTROPY AND REDUCED
SELECTION

We have come to view pleiotropy as one
possible limitation to the amount of reduction that can occur when selection is relaxed (Huxley 1932; Wright 1929), rather
than as a factor barring its occurrence.
A nonadaptive structure which is maintained as the result of selection acting upon
pleiotropic expressions of the genetic material should be highly variable, as most
vestigial structures are (Simpson, 1953,
p. 148; Huxley, 1932; Van Valen 1960).
However, if a reduced structure is maintained by direct selection acting against any
further reduction, one would not expect
unusual variation since the genetic basis for
the larger or more complex polymorphs
formerly selected for will eventually be
lost. This later phenomena may characterize several trends observable in human evolution (Brace, 1962, 19645; Dahlberg, 1964;
Garn, 1964; Brace and Montagu, 1965).

Mutations and Reduced Selection 19

THE EVIDENCE ON RECORD

It only remains for us to demonstrate
the existence in nature of a nonadaptive
orientation toward reduction and simplification when selection is reduced. Reduction
in size or complexity is the most probable,
although not unique, result of the accumulation of mutations when selection is reduced. Reduction under these conditions
can be distinguished from reduction due to
direct selection, correlated adaptive change,
meiotic drive, genetic drift (and other
sampling errors), and functionally correlated change (see Holloway, 1966; Prout,
1964; and Simpson, 1953, for further discussion of reduction not due to the accumulation of mutations). The distinguishing
criterion is variability. Only mutation accumulation, when selection is reduced, results
in a concomitant increase in population
variability with respect to the structure
concerned,

Through the application of the criteria
discussed above to the data collected from
fossils or modern populations it is possible
to determine whether or not any reduction
which has occurred is the result of relaxation of selection, without invoking tautological arguments. With this determination,
we can bring evidence to bear upon the
crucial questions of the frequency and importance of this postulated evolutionary
orientation,

A large body of zoological literature
supports several contentions relevant to
the discussion above. It has been predicted
that in instances of reduction due to relaxed
selection, the structures undergoing reduc-~
tion should tend to be more variable than
those either maintained by, or reduced as a
result of, selection. This phenomenon of
increased variability in structures undergoing reduction has been consistently observed in such varied organisms as termites
(Emerson, 1961); cave fish (Breder, 1944);
frog tadpoles (DeBeer, 1958); horses (Simpson, 1951); certain snakes (Gregory, 1951);

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

20 Wolpoff

hind limbs of the whale (Huxley, 1932);
functionless teeth in Hoplophoneus and
Ptilodus (Simpson, 1953). It has been shown
in respect to colorblindness, visual acuity,
auditory acuity, breast cancer and other diseases of lactation, and the nasal septum in
living human beings (Neel and Post, 1963;
Post, 19622, b, 19632, b, 19642, 6, 19662,
b). For almost every case mentioned, the
investigator has suggested that reduction
occurred when a formerly maintained selective pressure was relaxed. In addition, there
are many reports in the literature, such as
the study of orangutan hallucal reduction
conducted by Tuttle and Rogers (1966), in
which reduction associated with increased
variability is observed and possible selective factors are mentioned. I suggest a closer
examination of the postulated selective
factors in the light of the observed variability.

Thus, there is widespread confirmation of
the predictions generated by the model of
genic action discussed here already present
in the literature. These instances present
data which are incompatible with the interpretation that direct selection, or any other
possible orientation other than that of relaxed selection allowing the accumulation of
mutations, has caused the reduction (see
Emerson, 1961; Van Valen, 1960).

In Post’s work we can find an additional
confirmation of reduced selection. The
distribution of visual and auditory acuity
shows the most reduction, and the greatest
variability, in precisely those populations
which have not required these abilities for
their survival over the longest period of
time. The distribution of lactation abnormalities and breast cancer indicates the
same pattern of distribution. Thus, there is
an even more direct confirmation of reduced
selection.

SUMMARY

While there are many causes of structural
reduction in evolution, the accumulation of

 

Social Biology

mutations when selection is relaxed is a
differentiable mechanism. Such reduction is
terminated by (a) the eventual loss of the
structure in question, along with the loss of
some of the genetic material responsible for
it, (b) the maintenance of the structure in a
reduced form with a high degree of variability, due to selection acting upon the
pleiotropic effects of part of the genetic
material this is the so-called “vestigial
structure” or (c) the maintenance of the
structure in its reduced or simplified form as
a result of positive selection against any
further reduction. Some evidence indicates
the third possibility as the most common
one (Brace and Montagu, 1965).

A consideration of the studies of structural reduction in evolution already present
in the literature shows reduction due to the
accumulation of mutations to be widespread
and common. Reduced selection is thus not
a rare evolutionary phenomena.

APPLICATION TO HUMAN EVOLUTION

While we have answered the question of
frequency, we must yet consider the importance of this nonadaptive evolutionary orientation. One would expect that this phenomenon would be particularly characteristic of human evolution. There has been an
increasing capacity of culture to act as man’s
major adaptive mechanism. The course of
human evolution has been largely oriented
by increasing selection for man’s capacity to
be an effective culture-bearing creature.
With this orientation has come an associated relaxation of the selective pressures
acting upon those morphological features
whose function has been supplemented or
replaced by behavioral or technological
cultural innovations.

Post’s studies of selection relaxation in
recent populations adequately demonstrate
this point. Cultural innovations have increasingly reduced selection for the maintenance of visual and auditory acuity. I
suggest that the same results can be found in

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

 

 

 

Vol. 16, No. 1

the analysis of any abnormality for which
there is a cultural compensation.

Peering further into the past, this interpretation has been applied to the reconstructed evolutionary history of many
morphological traits. Perhaps the most highly criticized application has been in the
interpretation of the observed trend toward
dental reduction (Brues, 1966; Bailit and
Friedlaender, 1966). The hypothesis that
this trend is the result of reduced selection
for a larger dentition due to the increasingly
efficient replacement of the teeth as tools or
weapons by culture has been proposed by
many authors in addition to Brace (1962,
1964), even without considering why reduced selection might result in size reduction (Dahlberg, 1964; Garn, 1964; Hooton,
1931).

If relaxed selection is to be proposed as
the cause of hominid dental reduction without invoking tautological reasoning, an
associated increase in dental variability
must be shown for at least the period of
reduction, The period of reduction varies
for different portions of the dentition and
among different populations. However,
Dahlberg (1964, p. 22) observes relaxed
selection for molar and premolar crown
grinding area in some extant populations.

Brace (1964; Brace and Montagu, 1965)
finds the beginnings of the reduction of
selection resulting in the current degree of
dental reduction to be in the technological
innovations following the development of
Upper Paleolithic blade-burin industries,
I think this hypothesis may be modified.
The transitional and unusually variable
nature of the skeletal material at Mount
Carmel (Brothwell, 1961; McCown and
Keith, 1939) and Broken Hill (Clark et al.,
1950; Pycraft, 1928), and the cultural assoClations of these materials with Middle
Paleolithic industries (Garrod, 1962; Garrod and Bate, 1937; Higgs, 1961; Clark,
1960; Clark et al., 1950) indicates a reduction of selection originating in the more

Mutations and Reduced Selection 21

advanced facies of the Middle Paleolithic.
In any event, Dahlberg (1964) observes the
most extreme dental reduction in those
populations that have been associated with
an Upper Paleolithic blade-burin industry
for the longest period of time (p. 21), Both
the earliest and subsequently the greatest
dental reductions can be found among populations in the Near East and Europe (p. 20)
—areas in which the earliest Upper Paleolithic industries have been found (Garrod,
1962; Howell, 1959; Pradel, 1966; MullerBeck, 1966).

In spite of the suggestive nature of these
observations, I feel compelled to point out,
contrary to Brues (1966) and Bailit and
Friedlaender (1966), that the information
necessary either to corroborate or to refute
this interpretation has not been gathered or
correctly utilized. Bailit and Friedlaender
base their conclusions on population averages and ranges for dental dimensions not
even corrected for body size. They claim a
lack of relation between tooth size and body
size. However, there is not a study in the
literature which, in attempting to find a
relation between tooth size and body size,
holds constant factors causing independent
variation of these traits. Their claim of no
relation is unfounded, and reasonable doubt
may be cast upon their conclusions. Brues,
on the other hand, suggests selective factors
which could be responsible for dental reduction. I suggest that the question of whether
or not reduced selection was responsible for
any particular trend toward reduction can
only be answered by examining the nature of
the data, and not by postulating possible,
but untestable, selective pressures. As Holloway concluded, this procedure can only
lead to tautologica!l reasoning (1966, p. 10).

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER
RESEARCH

Population averages and ranges are not
sufficient for testing this model. Estimates
of population variability are of crucial im 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

22 Wolpoff

portance. Factors which can cause the independent variation of the traits studied must
be controlled or isolated. Most of these data
are already available, but many must be
regathered so that we may be able to adequately test the model.

We need not stop with the testing of population data. A computer simulation of the
Watson-Crick DNA model could be of crucial importance. We could test the degree
of mutation accumulation associated with
various amounts of pleiotropy at the nucleotide base level, and various reductions
of selection for the phenotypic traits.

A well-grounded and potentially useful
evolutionary mechanism has been found in
this development of Brace’s ‘“‘probable mu
Social Biology

tation effect.” Specific criteria for the testing of the model have been generated. I
hope that the appropriate data will be tested, and further light thus may be shed upon
the factors which have oriented the direction
of human evolution.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I would like to acknowledge my sincere
indebtedness to Dr. Arthur H. Rohn of the
Department of Anthropology at the University
of Tilinois for the very great amount of help
extended to me in the preparation of this work,
and to Dr. C. L. Brace of the University of
Michigan for our conversations which have inspired many of the ideas developed here. Responsibility for the contents of this paper is
solely my own. This study was supported in
part by United States Public Health Service
Grant 5 Fl GM-30, 854-03.

REFERENCES

Barut, H.L., and J. S. FRIEDLAENDER. 1966. Tooth
size reduction: A hominid trend. Amer. Anthropol. 68:665-672.

Brace, C. L. 1962. Cultural factors in the evolution
of the human dentition, p. 343-354. M. F. Ashley
Montagu (ed.), Oxford, New York.

. 1963. Structural’ reduction in evolution.

Amer. Natur. 97:39-49,

. 1964. The probable mutation effect. Amer.

Natur. 98 :453-455.

1964b. The fate of the ‘classic’? Neanderthals: A consideration of hominid catastrophism.
Curr. Anthropol. 5:3-43, 7:204-214.

Brace, C. L., and M. F. AsHtEy Montacv. 1965.
Man’s evolution: An introduction to physical
anthropology. Macmillan, New York.

BrepEr, C. M. 1944. Ocular anatomy and light
sensitivity studies on the blind fish from Cueva
de los Sabinos, Mexico. Zoologica 94:131-143.

BROTHWELL, D. R. 1961. The people of Mount Carmel. Proc. Prehist. Soc. 27:155-159.

BruEs, A. M. 1966. ‘The probable mutation effect’”’
and the evolution of hominid teeth and jaws.
Amer. J. Phys. Anthropol. 25:169-171.

CLARK, J. D. 1960. Further excavations at Broken
Hill, Northern Rhodesia. J. Roy. Anthropol.
Inst. 89:201-231.

CLarkK, J. D., K. P. Oaxety, L. H. WELLS, and
jJ. A. C. McCLeLLanp. 1950. New studies on
Rivodeaian man. J. Roy. Anthropol. Inst. 77:7
Cricx, F. H. C. 1966. The genetic code III. Sci.
Amer, 215:55-62.

Danrserc, A. A. 1964. Dental evolution and culture, p. 19-31. In S. M. Garn (ed.), Culture and
the direction of human evolution. Wayne State,
Detroit.

DEBEER, G. R. 1940. Embryology and taxonomy,
p. 365-393. In J. S. Huxley (ed.), The new systematics. Clarendon, Oxford.

 

 

 

 

. 1958. Embryos and ancestors. Clarendon,
Oxford.

Doszyansky, T. 1955, Evolution, genetics, and
man. Wiley, New York.

. 1962. Mankind evolving. Yale Univ. Press,

New Haven.

1967. Lecture given at the 36th meeting
of the American Association of Physical Anthropologists.

Emerson, A. E. 1961. Vestigial characters of termites, ‘and processes of regressive evolution, Evolution 15:115-131.

FisHer, R. A. 1930. The genetical theory of natural
selection. Clarendon, Oxford.

FRAENKEL-Conrat, H, 1964. The genetic code of a
virus. Sci, Amer. 213:55-67.

Garn, S. M. 1964. Culture and the direction of human evolution, p. 3-18. In S. M. Garn (ed.),
Culture and the direction of human evolution.
Wayne State, Detroit.

Garrop, D. A. E. 1962. The middle paleolithic of
the Near East and the problem of the Mount
porneel man, J. Roy. Anthropol. Inst. 52:232
Garrop, D. A. E., and D. M. A. Bate. 1937. The
stone age of Mount Carmel, Vol. I. Excavations
at the Wady El-Mughara. Oxford, New York.

Grecory, W. K. 1951. Evolution emerging: A survey of changing patterns from primeval life to
man. 2 vols. Macmillan, New York.

Hices, E. S, 1961. Some pleistocene faunas from the
Mediterranean coastal areas. Proc. Prehist. Soc.
27: 144-154,

Hirscu, J. 1963. Behavior genetics and individuality
understood. Science 142:1436-1442.

Hotioway, R. L., Jr. 1966. “Structural reduction”
through the probable mutation effect. Amer. J.
Phys. Anthropol. 25:7-11.

Hoorow, E. A. 1931. Up from the ape. Macmillan,
New York.

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Vol. 16, No. 1

HowELt, F. C. 1959. Upper pleistocene stratigraphy
and early man in the Levant. Proc. Amer. Phil.
Soc. 103:1-65.

Hux .ey, J. S. 1932. Problems of relative growth.
Methuen, London.

. 1942. Evolution, the modern synthesis.
Allen, London.

InGRAM, V. M. 1957, Genetic mutations in human
haemoglobin: The chemical difference between
normal and sickle-cell haemoglobin. Nature 180:
326~328.

Jacoz, F., and J. Monop. 1961. On the regulation of
gene activity. Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on
Quantitative Biology 26:318-356.

LERNER, I. M. 1954, Genetic homeostasis. Oliver
and Boyd, Edinburgh.

LEWONTIN, R. C. 1957. The adaptations of populations to varying environments. Cold Spring Harber Symposium on Quantitative Biology 22 :395408.

 

Li, C. C. 1955, Population genetics. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

McCown, T., and A. Kritn. 1939. The stone age of
Mount Carmel, Vol. II. The fossil human remains
from the Levalloiso-Mousterian. Oxford, New
York.

MATHER, K., and B. J. HARRrson. 1949, The manifold effects of selection. Heredity 3:1-52, 131162.

Mayr, E. 1963. Animal species and evolution.
Belknap, Cambridge.

Mu tter-BeEck, H. 1966. Paleohunters in America:
Origins and diffusion. Science 152:1191-1210.

NEEL, J. V., and R. H. Post. 1963. Transitory
“positive” selection for colorblindness? Eugen.
Quart. 10:33-35.

Pervutz, M. F. 1958. Some recent advances in molecular biology. Endeavour 17:190-203.

Post, R. H. 1962a. Population differences in red and
green color vision deficiency: A review and a
query on selection relaxation. Eugen. Quart.
9:131-146.

. 19626. Population differences in vision

acuity: A review with speculative notes on selec
tion relaxation. Eugen. Quart. 9:189-212.

 

Mutations and Reduced Selection 23

. 19630. “Colorblindness” and relaxed selec
tion. Eugen. Quart. 10:84—-85.

. 19636. “Colorblindness” in Britain, France,

and Japan: A review with notes on selection re
laxation. Eugen. Quart. 10:110-118.

. 1964¢c. Hearing acuity among Negroes and

whites. Eugen. Quart, 11:65-81.

64b. Appraisals of civilized man and

savages. Eugen. Quart. 11:168-169.

. 1965. Jews, genetics, and disease. Eugen.

Quart. 12:162-164.

. 1966a. Breast cancer, lactation, and genet
ics. Eugen. Quart. 13 :1-29.

. 19668. Deformed nasal septa and relaxed
selection. Eugen. Quart. 13:101-112.

PRADEL, L. 1966. Transition from the Mousterian
to the Perigordian. Curr. Anthropol. 7:33-50.

Prout, T. 1964. Observations on structural reduction in evolution. Amer. Natur. 98:239-249.,

Pycrart, W. P. (ed.). 1928. Rhodesian man and
associated remains. British Museum, London.

Smupson, G. G. 1951. Horses. Oxford Univ. Press,
New York.

. 1953. The major features of evolution.
Columbia Univ. Press, New York.

STERN, C, 1960. Principles of human genetics. 2nd
ed. W. Freeman, San Francisco.

Turt1e, R. H., and C. M. Rocers. 1966. Genetic
and selective factors in reduction of the hallux in
Pongo pygmaeus. Amer. J. Phys. Anthropol.
24:191-198,

Van VALEN, L. 1960. Nonadaptive aspects of evolution. Amer. Natur. 94:305-308.

WapoinctTon, C. H. 1957, The strategy of the genes.
Allen and Unwin, London.

. 1962. New patterns in genetics and development. Columbia Univ. Press, New York.

Wricut, S. 1929, Fisher’s theory of dominance.
Amer. Natur. 68:274-279,

. 1931. Evolution in Mendelian populations.

Genetics 16:97-159.

. 1964. Pleiotropy in the evolution of structur
al reduction and of dominance. Amer. Natur.

98 : 65-69.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
