Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Founding of the behavior genetics association

To cite this article: (1970) Founding of the behavior genetics association, Social Biology, 17:2,
147-148, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1970.9987863

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1970.9987863

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

%
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lil Article views: 3

»
Q View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:53
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Behavior Genetics

 

 

 

Founding of the Behavior Genetics Association

The initial organizational meeting for an
association of behavior genetics was held at
the University of Illinois on March 30, 1970
with Jerry Hirsch as host and R. D. Bock
and R. J. Rose assisting in the arrangement
of an agenda.

As had been decided at the informal meeting in December in Boston, all persons who
had indicated an interest in participating in
the organization of the association were invited to attend the March meeting. Mr.
Frederick Osborn, on behalf of the American
Eugenics Society, pledged transportation
for twenty people to Urbana. Travel expenses were offered preferentially to those
who had received the highest number of
nominations to an organizing committee for
the association on an earlier questionnaire.
For practical reasons, this was restricted to
persons presently resident in the United
States. Richard H. Osborne made arrangements for invitations and transportation
expenses to the meeting.

A group of seventeen individuals participated in the organizational meeting at the
Ilini Union. Three others who had planned
to attend were unable to do so because of
airline strikes. Present were Gordon Allen,
V. Elving Anderson, R. Darrell Bock, Jan
Bruell, Arthur Falek, Irving I. Gottesman,
J. P. Hegmann, Kenneth E. Henry, Leonard
L. Heston, Jerry Hirsch, Arnold R. Kaplan,
Seymour Kessler, John C. Loehlin, Richard
H. Osborne, Richard J. Rose, Steven G.
Vandenberg, and George Winokur, R. H.
Osborne acted as informal chairman for the
meeting.

The name of the proposed organization
was discussed at length, as was the fact that
it was important that the organization be
open to behavior scientists who were biologically oriented but who were not geneticists in the narrow sense, Although other
names were proposed, the name “Behavior
Genetics Association” polled a strong majority of votes when a written vote was
taken. Subsequently the seventeen members
of the organizational group unanimously
approved this choice as the name for the
organization.

It was agreed that in addition to a constitution committee, committees should be
formed to deal with issues of membership,
program, communications, and public and
professional affairs. It was suggested that a
small group of individuals be invited to be
charter members of the new organization
and asked to contribute dues sufficient to
provide initial operating funds for the organization. Invitation to charter membership would follow nomination by the provisional membership committee and approval
of the executive council. Suggested criteria
for membership were the possession of an
advanced degree or professional position,
active research activity, and demonstrated
commitment to the purposes of the organization, International representation is desired.

It was decided that a provisional nominating committee was not necessary in that
the organizing committee would function as
a committee-of-the-whole, and the constitution could subsequently specify the function, nature, and membership of the nomi
147
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

148 Behavior Genetics

nating committee. For the present, an executive council was created consisting of the
chairmen of the five established provisional
committees with Jerry Hirsch as an exofficio member. Richard H. Osborne was
unanimously elected President-pro-tem.

Present at the organizational meeting
were the editors of Social Biology, Behavior
Genetics, and Animal Behavior. Gordon Allen pointed out that the organization could
align with any or all of these publications
rather than publish a separate journal. Examples of professional societies which have
never had a journal were cited. The possibility of a newsletter to provide a service to the
membership was discussed favorably by several individuals. I. I. Gottesman proposed
that Social Biology continue as the communication medium for the organization for the
coming year, and this proposal was unanimously approved by the organizing committee.

The program committee proposed the
Easter recess of 1971 as the time for the first
meeting of the organization. Offers of a possible program site had been received from
B, E. Ginsburg at the University of Connecticut, and also from J. R. Royce at the

1This proposal was approved by the Board of

Directors of the American Eugenics Society at their
meeting on May 22, 1970.

Social Biology

University of Alberta. Notice of the finalized program site and agenda will appear in
a future issue of Social Biology.

The major work of the afternoon session
was the specification of the charge to each
provisional committee and designation of its
full membership. The executive council and
the committees with their chairmen and
members are as follows: Executive Council,
Richard H. Osborne, President-pro-tem,
Gordon Allen, R. Darrell Bock, Irving I.
Gottesman, Jerry Hirsch, Seymour Kessler,
Richard J. Rose; Constitution Committee,
R. Darrell Bock, Chairman, V. Elving Anderson, John C, Loehlin, R. C. Nichols, J. P.
Scott; Membership Committee, Gordon Allen,
Chairman, J. P. Hegmann, Leonard L.
Heston, Jerry Hirsch, G. C. McClearn, V, A.
McKusick; Program Committee, Seymour
Kessler, Chairman, L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling,
Benson Ginsburg, Kenneth E. Henry, J. R.
Royce, David Rosenthal; Public and Professional Affairs Committee, Irving I. Gottesman, Chairman, Jan Bruel, J. C. Defries,
Th. Dobzhansky, Arthur Falek, Gardner
Lindzey, Sheldon Reed, George Winokur;
Communication Commitiee, Richard J. Rose,
Chairman, Arnold R. Kaplan, Lissy F.
Jarvik, Delbert D. Thiessen, Steven G.
Vandenberg.
