Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Reply to Saini's comment on “the brain drain from
India”

Herbert Inhaber

To cite this article: Herbert Inhaber (1977) Reply to Saini's comment on “the brain drain from
India”, Social Biology, 24:1, 91-91, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1977.9988268

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1977.9988268

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Fone | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
ail Article views: 2
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 1 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:36

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Vol. 24, No. 1

Reply to Saini’s Comment on
“The Brain Drain from India”

Herbert Inhaber

Advanced Concepts Centre
Planning and Finance Service
Environment Canada

Ottawa, Canada ~

The brain drain can be viewed as adequately described through government
lists of visas and emigration permits or, if
this is deemed unsatisfactory, evaluated
through unobtrusive measures. J have
worked long enough in government to
Know that much of its data are, to say the
least, imperfect. As a result, I decided to
use more objective and less confused
measures.

Who is Publishing in Science (WIPIS)
is, by now, acknowledged as a valuable
tool by sociologists of science. This is
brone out by the scores of articles which
have employed either it or its companion
publication, the Science Citation Index.

It can be misused. However, there is
simply nothing else comparable which lists
most of the world’s working scientists,
their addresses, and the papers they publish,

WIPIS lists scientists by where they are
publishing, not by their visas or source of
funds. It can then be used to cut through
often confusing government statistics.
Nowhere did J state I was evaluating visa
status. I was considering where Scientists
were, not where governments thought
they were.

These major points aside, let me discuss
the comments in detail. In paragraph four,
the entire point of my correlation values

Communications

91

was missed. This was perhaps due to the
condensation required in the original article. I was trying to show that most Indian
name groups tended to remain fairly constant in their location for the two years
considered. For example, a name like Sastri was concentrated more than 80 per cent
in India for the two years; a name like
Srinavasan was only about 50 per cent in
India. In consequence, the comments of
paragraph four are invalid.

Those of paragraph five testify, as
Robert Merton has written, “to a powerful (though perhaps slightly willful) imagination.” My reference to “all scientists in India” came immediately after—
and before—two sentences which clearly
indicated that I was referring to scientists
listed under “India” in WIPIS. I did not
contact CSIR for the reasons stated above.
The paragraph is a distortion of what I
said.

Finally, the last paragraph is a contradiction of what was said before. If there
is a surplus of scientists in India, it is
logical that some would try to leave. Their
lega) status is, in the long run, less important than the fact they do their work
outside their home country.

Most of the points I made here were
contained in the fifth paragraph of my
original article. I am sorry to have to repeat them.
