Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Adaptive response of hominids to their
environment as ascertained by fossil evidence

David Pilbeam

To cite this article: David Pilbeam (1972) Adaptive response of hominids to their
environment as ascertained by fossil evidence, Social Biology, 19:2, 115-127, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1972.9987977

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987977

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

ee
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 6

»
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 5 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:32

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Adaptive Response of Hominids
Environment as Ascertained by
Fossil Evidence

David Pilbeam

Department of Anthropology
Yale University
New Haven, Connecticut

Paleoanthropology has been influenced
ever since The Descent of Man (1871)
was published by evolutionary theories
which have relied heavily upon nonfossil
data. Indeed, many widely accepted hypotheses are only now being adequately
tested by fossil specimens. Darwin, of
course, knew of just one fossil hominid,
the original Neanderthaler from Diisseldorf, and he based most of his account of
hominid phylogeny on comparative data
(Darwin, 1871). For Darwin, the course
of human evolution seemed fairly clear. He
placed great emphasis on man’s bipedality,
and upon his use of tools as weapons.
Darwin (1871, pp. 135, 136) stated his
case as follows:

Man alone has become a biped... . Man

could not have attained his present domi
nant position in the world without the use
of his hands .... But the hands and arms
could hardly have become perfect enough
to have manufactured weapons, or to have
hurled stones and spears with a true aim,
as long as they were habitually used for
locomotion and for supporting the whole

weight of the body .. . or so long as they
were especially fitted for climbing trees.

A little further (p. 137), Darwin continued:

[As bipeds, men] would thus have been
better able to defend themselves with stones

to Their

 

 

or clubs, to attack their prey, or otherwise
to obtain food.

Finally, in what has become one of the
better-known passages in The Descent of
Man (p. 138), Darwin outlined his view
of the relationship between weapon use
and canine and facial reduction in man’s
evolution.

The free use of the arms and hands, partly
the cause and partly the result of man’s
erect position, appears to have led in an
indirect manner to other modifications of
structure. The early male forefathers of
man were .. . probably furnished with
great canine teeth; but as they gradually
acquired the habit of using stones, clubs,
or other weapons, for fighting with their
enemies, or rivals, they would use their
jaws and teeth less and less. In this case,
the jaws, together with the teeth, would
become reduced in size, as we may feel
almost sure from innumerable analogous
cases.

This particular view of hominid evolution—the idea that the shift from arboreal
ape to ground-dwelling hominid involved
the initial adoption of erect posture and
the invention and use of tools as weapons
—is still a major theme in many modern
theories of hominid evolution (Washburn,
1971). For example, Wolpoff (1968) has
this to say:

115

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

116 Pilbeam

Thus, the early employment of tools as a
means of defense led to the differentiation
of the hominid stock, necessitating bipedal
locomotion as well as providing its selective
advantage. Culture, in this context, can be
viewed as an adaptation to insure the effective transmission of tool use from generation to generation (p. 479).

The primary hominid morphological adaptation centers about bipedal locomotion.
Other distinctive hominid characteristics
either arise from this adaptation, or form
secondary adaptations (p. 478).

Since the fossil record of the earliest
hominids is still only poorly known, these
statements are, of course, speculative.
Thus, theories of human origins which
ignore or pay only lip-service to paleontological data can be traced back at least to
The Descent of Man. In many ways, this
is understandable, for until recently the
fossil record has been patchy, poorly dated,
and the level of interpretative skill displayed by paleontologists of the Hominidae
has not been particularly sophisticated.
However, I do believe that this is now
changing. While evolutionary studies must
remain firmly rooted in careful analyses of
social behavior and functional anatomy of
living primates, including man (Washburn,
1971), paleontologists are now in a good
position to evaluate some conflicting hypotheses and to offer some of their own. I
think the basic point has to be this: While
nonpaleontological sources can give us data
about branching sequences in phylogeny
and can focus our attention on important
evolutionary events (for example, language
evolution, or the expansion of the brain),
only fossils can tell us when an event occurred, or how fast something happened.
In the current literature one can find
estimates for the date of divergence of
hominids from pongids ranging from four
million to thirty million years. I think it
likely that the origins of our family date
back to around fifteen million years ago.
I would accept the view that man and the

Social Biology

African apes—the ordinary and pygmy
chimpanzees, and the gorilla—are about
equally related in that they share a common ancestor not shared with other primates. Therefore, I would look for evidence
that lineages leading to the gorilla and
chimpanzee were also diverging fifteen to
twenty million years ago. Two extinct
African pongids, Dryopithecus africanus
and Dryopithecus major, seem to me to be
quite plausible ancestors of chimp and
gorrilla. They are dated at around eighteen
million years (Pilbeam, 1969).

D. africanus is the better known of the
two, and in cranial and dental morphology
looks like a smaller version of a pygmy
chimpanzee, with some primitive features.
Postcranially it is well known, at least as
far as the forelimb is concerned. The
original study by Napier and Davis (1959)
together with more recent work (Conroy
and Fleagle, in press) has demonstrated
that the forelimb of D. africanus resembled
the chimpanzee more closely than it resembled any other primate. More recently,
Lewis (1971) has shown that the wrist
morphology of D. africanus is similar to
that of the chimpanzee. All these data suggest a phylogenetic relationship between
the two and also imply that D. africanus,
if not a full-fledged knuckle-walker (Tuttle,
1969) like the chimpanzee, may at least
have been evolving in that direction. Unpublished data for D. major, together with
the recently redescribed forelimb remains
attributed to the middle Miocene European
Dryopithecus fontani (Pilbeam and Simons, 1971), support the idea that the
Miocene and Pliocene pongids as a group
may have been adapting or adapted to
knuckle-walking, at least at a minimal
level. It is not correct to describe the Dryopithecines as “dental apes,” with skeletons
like those of monkeys (Sarich, 1971).

Only one of the mid- to late-Tertiary
hominoid genera looks as though it could
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 19, No. 2

have been ancestral to the Pliocene and
Pleistocene hominids Australopithecus and
Homo. This is Ramapithecus, a form known
from deposits in East Africa and the Indian
subcontinent (Simons, 1968; Pilbeam,
1968). Ramapithecus wickeri comes from
Fort Ternan, Kenya (Leakey, 1962) and
was found alongside animals indicating an
open woodland habitat (Gentry, 1970);
the deposit is dated at between 12.5 million
and 14 million years (Bishop, Miller, and
Fitch, 1969). The closely related R. punjabicus (Pilbeam, 1969) has been found in
Pakistan and India, in sites which suggest
more forested conditions (Tattersall,
1969), Dates are less certain, but it is unlikely that the deposits are older than
thirteen million or much younger than
eleven million years (Simons, Pilbeam, and
Boyer, 1971). Unfortunately, Ramapithecus is presently known only from dental,
facial, and mandibular material (Simons,
1968).

In terms of probability, I think that
there is at least a 75% chance that Ramapithecus is ancestral to later Hominidae. It
exhibits a number of dental, facial, and
mandibular features found elsewhere only
among undoubted hominids. Its locomotor
behavior is unknown, although it is possible
that it was either an early knuckle-walker
like the Dryopithecines, or else a hangingswinging form somewhat like the orangutan; it may well not have been a biped.
Also, it seems not to have been a habitual
tool-maker; it was not dependent upon
tools for survival.

Whether one wishes to classify Ramapithecus as a hominid or a man-like pongid
seems to me to be irrelevant. More important, if it is ancestral to living primates,
it is only ancestral to Homo sapiens and
not to any other species (Pilbeam, 1963).

Other workers argue for a separation of
ape and human lineages still earlier than
fifteen million years ago (Leakey, 1967);

Adaptive Hominid Response

 

117

I have done so myself, although I now think
that any divergence much older than fifteen
million years is quite improbable. Sherwood
Washburn is an advocate of a five to ten
million year split of Hominidae and Pongidae (Washburn, 1971). In his view, the
earlest hominids evolved from forms very
similar to chimpanzees and were knucklewalkers that shifted their forest ecological
niche and frugivorous habits to become
open country tool-making hunters. Although there is almost no paleontological
evidence in that crucial five to ten million
year time period, such a late split receives
support from the biochemical work of Vincent Sarich and Allan Wilson (Sarich,
1971).

Sarich and Wilson have been working
with serum albumin, a blood protein, in a
variety of mammals, but with particular
emphasis on primates. Albumins of living
species are compared, and the differences
between them are described in terms of an
index of dissimilarity (I.D.); this is often
expressed as the so-called immunological
distance, which equals log I.D. & 100. L.D.
can be plausibly related to the number of
amino acid differences between a pair of
albumins. As the length of time since two
species last shared a common ancestor
increases, so in all probability will the
number of amino acid differences between
their albumins. These amino acid differences will show up as increasing I.D.
values,

A large series of cross-comparisons between species of primates shows a surprising uniformity in the albumin data. Thus,
spider monkey albumin, for example, is
equally different from rhesus, chimpanzee,
or human albumin as measured in I.D.
units. Such a set of results seems, in fact,
to be general. Thus if taxa A, B, and C
share a common ancestor at node 1, and A
and B have a latter common ancestor at
2, then the I.D. values of comparisons AC
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

 

118 Pilbeam

and BC will tend always to be subequal
(Figure 1). According to Sarich and Wilson,
this type of result, consistent over a wide
range of taxa, can only be explained by
assuming that, over a given period of time,
“equal” amounts of evolutionary change
occur in each lineage or that variations from
a mean value are random and can be
described by a Poisson distribution. This
uniformity can best be accounted for in
terms of regularity of change; that is,
changes in amino acid sequences of proteins
accumulate at a more or less constant rate
with respect to time. In the case of albumins, amino acid sequences are unknown;
but I.D. can be related to time by the function log I.D. = &t, where ¢ is the time since
divergence of the two taxa under consideration. The value of & can be calculated using
one divergence date which is based on
accurate paleontological data. Once this is

A B

 

Social Biology

done, divergence dates for all pairs of taxa
can be calculated.

Surprising results have emerged from
these studies. First, man and the other
hominoids, particularly the African apes,
are very similar genetically and quite
different from other primates (immunological distance of man-rhesus is 32 units;
man-chimp, only 7). This almost certainly
reflects the fact that the last common ancestor of man, chimp, and gorilla lived
much later in time than the original catarrhine ancestor.

Still more unexpected are the estimated
dates of divergence. These set the latest
hominoid common ancestor at ten million
years, while the hominids diverged from
African apes only four million years ago.
Because of the errors involved in estimating
such dates, these are not exact figures.
However, Sarich (1971, p. 76) has recently

C

Fic. 1.—Phenogram showing relationships between taxa A, B, and C.

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

stated his belief that “one no longer has
the option of considering a fossil specimen
older than about eight million years as a
hominid xo matter what it looks like.”

Such a categorical statement implies
considerable optimism on the part of the
writer and a good deal of faith in the
methods and theories being used. If correct,
these results would mean that none of the
Dryopithecus group have anything to do
with later hominoids (except possibly one
species); all similarities between JD.
africanus and D. major, on the one hand,
and chimpanzee and gorilla, on the other,
would be parallelisms. Ramapithecus,
which became extinct without descendants,
would be just a “dental hominid.”

Here then, we have quite radical differences between paleontological dates of divergence for Hominoidea and the biochemically based estimates. How can one tackle
this sort of problem? Well, I have looked
again and again at the fossil data; some of
it is not very good, but it is a lot better
than some would have it. I -am confident
that the hominoid adaptive radiation occurred before ten million years ago. I am
also reasonably sure (as I said before, more
than 75% certain) that Ramapithecus is
ancestral to Australopithecus and Homo.

How, then, can these biochemical results
be explained? The albumin dating method
works, according to Sarich, Wilson, and
others (Kimura, 1968; King and Jukes,
1969), because, over a long enough period
of time, amino acid changes accumulate
at a constant rate.

Evolutionary events—in this case not
amino acid replacements, but rather base
pair changes in DNA—occur at random;
amino acid replacements, it is argued, are
all selectively equivalent, and hence, over
a given period of time, the rate of amino
acid substitutions will be constant. This
“neutral mutation” theory explains the uniformity in the albumin data, as well as that

Adaptive Hominid Response

 

119

to be found in other proteins, including
those such as cytochromes C and hemoglobin that have been sequenced over a
wide range of taxa.

Such a hypothesis is, of course, hard to
validate because of the absence of welldated fossil proteins. However, the problem has been tackled in the following way
(King and Jukes, 1969). A series of sequenced proteins, for example cytochromes
C, are examined. A particular codon is
surveyed throughout the entire series of
proteins; one codon is arbitrarily designated the “ancestral one,” and the number
of base changes necessary to account for
all the observed codons are counted.
This procedure is followed for all codon
positions. Codons are then grouped according to number of estimated replacements,
and the number of codons in each such
group are counted. The frequency distribution of base changes per codon derived
from such an analysis can be described
very well by a Poisson distribution, a distribution which assumes that events are
rare but equally likely. This result has
been used to argue that fixations at various
amino acid positions are equally likely and
therefore result from fixation of neutral
mutations.

However, my colleagues at Yale, Drs.
Uzzell and Corbin, have suggested a different approach (Corbin and Uzzell, 1970;
Uzzell and Pilbeam, in press). They point
out that the above comparisons are phenetic,
that is, based on similarities and differences of proteins in living species, and
ignore the evolutionary pathways taken by
each lineage. Thus, phenetic estimates miss
parallel mutations, back mutations, alternative mutations (or mutations to synonymous codons) and therefore underestimate the total number of evolutionary
events (that is, base changes) which
actually occurred during evolution.

Corbin and Uzzell (1970) performed
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

120 Pilbeam

what they call pkyletic analysis on a
variety of sequenced proteins: cytochromes C, hemoglobin a and B chains, and
various fibrinopeptides A and B. First,
using all available paleontological, neontological, and biochemical data, they established a phylogeny or branching sequence
for an array of taxa. Using this phylogeny,
the minimal number of fixations for each
codon were counted and grouped as before.
For analyses of this type, a single Poisson
distribution does not adequately describe
the distribution of base changes. Instead,
the phyletically inferred fixations are best
described either by a negative binomial
distribution or by two Poisson distributions. These assume varying probabilities
of events, and thus such analyses do not
support the idea of neutral mutations and
constant rates of protein evolution. Other
workers, for example Richmond (1970),
Clarke (1970), and Kohne (1970) have
also argued on other grounds against constant rates of protein evolution.

The fact that phenetic estimates underestimate the number of actual base changes
means that, even if the hypothesis of constant evolutionary rates were accepted, the
“protein clock” will give incorrect answers.
Thus, if it is calibrated with an event, say
thirty million years old, estimates for more
recent branch points will be too old, while
more ancient divergences will be too young.
Tf the albumin-based four-million-year
origin of hominids is still too old, then the
fossil record is being questioned not where
it is weak, but where it is firm and widely
accepted (Uzzell and Pilbeam, in press).

But if protein evolution does not occur
at a regular rate, why the uniformity in the
I1.D. comparisons for albumins, and for
those proteins where sequences are known?
There are at least two main reasons why
these phenetic measures appear uniform.
First, they are phenetic, and the actual
amount of change in each lineage has been

Social Biology

truncated. Parallelisms, back mutations,
and so forth go undetected, and the relative
amount of truncation increases with time.
Second, much of the uniformity results
from the correlation of parts with wholes.
Thus, for the situation with taxa A, B,
and C (Figure 1), the phenetic measurements of AC and BC (which could be I.D.
values or sequence differences) will be
highly correlated since the part of the
phenogram from C to common ancestor of
A and B is a large part common to the
whole of both comparisons. Inevitably, AC
and BC will be similar (Uzzell and
Pilbeam, in press).

But how are we to account for the close
similarity, biochemically, of man and the
African apes, and their divergence from
other primates? For example, the immunological distance of man and chimp is 7
units; man and rhesus is 32, a difference
of 1 to 4.5 (Sarich, 1971). Fossil evidence
would suggest a divergence date of fifteen
million plus years for man and chimp and
up to forty million for man and rhesus, a
difference of about 1 to 2.5. If the fossil
dates are correct, then protein evolution
has slowed down within the hominoid
lineages. Goodman (1961), Goodman et
al. (1971), and Kohne (1970) have all
produced data that support the idea that
protein evolution has slowed in hominoids,
and have suggested mechanisms by which
rates of hominoid protein evolution might
have been reduced.

If protein “clocks” are not regular as
claimed, and if our paleontology is not far
off, then we can trace the hominid lineage
back to at least thirteen or fourteen million
years ago. Ramapithecus is a _ dental
hominid, a form with relatively large cheek
teeth and small anterior teeth, including
canines. Even if it is compared only to female pongids, the anterior dentition is still
reduced in Ramapithecus. However, it may
not have been a biped and apparently was

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

not dependent upon tools for survival. If
correct, this interpretation throws considerable doubt on some generally accepted
theories of hominid differentiation. It may
well be that, as Jolly (1970a) has recently
suggested, hominids differentiated from
pongids as open country feeders on small
tough vegetable objects, the shift in diet
being responsible, at least in part, for the
evolution of small anterior teeth. Such a
view gains support from recent analyses of
Gigantopithecus (Pilbeam, 1970), an extinct Asian hominoid, and Hadropithecus
(Jolly, 19705), an extinct Jemur from
Madagascar. Both show this combination
of large cheek teeth and small incisors and
canines; both were probably adapted to
small object feeding, and neither made
tools. So, we may well have to reconsider
our ideas about the earliest hominids; most
of all, however, we need a good deal more
fossil evidence.

Tracing the hominid fossil record after
Ramapithecus is difficult at present; the
earliest undoubted Australopithecus specimen, a mandible with one tooth from
Lothagam in Kenya (Patterson, Behrensmeyer, and Sill, 1970), is dated at 5.5
million years. The gap between Ramapithecus and the Lothagam specimen is filled
only by one possibly hominid tooth from
nine-million-year-old deposits in the Lake
Baringo region of Kenya (Bishop and
Chapman, 1970), and a possible hominid,
as yet undescribed, from the Pontian of
Greece that could be six to nine million
years old.

In the past decade, the late Pliocene
and early Pleistocene hominid sequence in
Africa has become much better understood;
perhaps even more important has been the
development of geochemical and geophysical dating and correlative techniques, such
as potassium-argon and fission-track dating
and the working out of the sequence of
paleomagnetic reversals. These are begin
Adaptive Hominid Response

121

ning to revolutionize our ideas about evolution among the Australopithecines and the .
transition to the genus Homo. Sites yielding Australopithecus are now known to
range in age in East Africa from over five
million to around 1.5 million years (Bishop
and Miller, in press), Unfortunately, the
important cave sites in South Africa at
present cannot be “absolutely” dated; however, it is now possible to assign the major
ones, Makapansgat, Sterkfontein, and
Swartkrans tentatively to the period between two and three million years ago
(Cooke, personal communication). Thus,
they are all probably older than the Olduvai hominids (Curtis and Hay, in press),
an important point that, if correct, will
have considerable impact.

Earlier work in South Africa established
the probable existence of two species of
Australopithecus, a smaller one, A. africanus, and a larger and more robust form
with bigger teeth, A. robustus (Robinson,
1954). A. africanus came from Taung,
Sterkfontein, and Makapansgat, sites now
thought to fall between 2.5 and 3 million
years. A. robustus came from Kromdraai
and Swartkrans. Swartkrans is now thought
to be possibly 2 to 2.5 million years old.
A, africanus, although older than A. robustus, was said to be the ancestor of later
hominids, while A. robustus became extinct.
Also from Swartkrans came a third species,
the so-called Telanthropus, a form said
to be close to the ancestry of Homo erectus,
presumably part of the same lineage as
A, africanus.

More recently, dated remains of Australopithecines have been reported in large
numbers from a variety of sites in East
Africa: Olduvai, Omo, East Rudolf, Lothagam, Kanapoi, Peninj, and Baringo
(Howell, 1971). They appear to fall into
two lineages, both extending through a fair
range of time. A small-toothed group is
known from a variety of sites, ranging in
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

122

age from perhaps as much as 5.5 million
to 1.5 million years (at which point the
lineage apparently intergrades into Homo
erectus). Early forms in this lineage resemble A. africanus from South Africa; later
ones, with smaller teeth and larger brains
are described as Australopithecus or Homo
habilis, the probable antecedent of Z.
erectus (Simons, Pilbeam, and Ettel, 1969).

The larger-toothed lineage ranges in age
from about four million to 1.5 million
years; for much of this time the East
African specimens resemble South African
A. robustus from Swartkans. Later, however, at around two million years, this
lineage becomes even more robust, with
still larger cheek teeth (Tobias, 1967),
and is probably best described as A. boisez.

Thus, I would envisage at the moment a
scheme with two lineages evolving side by
side in Africa during the Pliocene and early
Pleistocene, one relatively small, the other
perhaps twice as large (Figure 2). The
former seems to have evolved into H.
erectus, while the latter probably became
extinct. Traditionally, it has been believed
that only the “gracile” hominids made
stone tools, while the “robust” forms did
not; A. robustus and A. boisei, it is argued,
were cultureless herbivores (Robinson,
1971),

It is difficult to say much about behavior
in these early forms. We know that they
were bipeds. Beginning some 2.5 to 3
million years ago at least one of them was
making patterned stone tools, was hunting
and eating meat, and probably living in
campsites for more than a day at a time
(Issaac, Leakey, and Behrensmeyer, 1971).
Whether both lineages were making stone
tools is impossible to say at present. At
that low level of technological sophistication, one type of tool “culture” would
inevitably look much like another. However, several recent studies should help
to clarify this issue and also expand our

Pilbeam

Social Biology

knowledge of the
hominids.

Lovejoy and his coworkers have suggested that the A. africanus lineage, at
least, consisted of well-adapted bipeds,
rather than relatively inefficient upright
walkers as most of us have believed (Lovejoy and Heiple, 1970; Heiple and Lovejoy,
1971). If true, this is a most important
finding. Second, Holloway (1970) has
recalculated brain volumes in the Australopithecines. The small A. africanus yield
mean brain volumes of around 440 cm?,
while the larger A. robustus and A. boisei
have volumes of more than 500 cm®. A
habilis volumes range from 600 to 680 cm,
as might be expected for a species temporally intermediate between A. africanus and
H. erectus. The mean volume of the earliest
H. erectus is just over 800 cm*. Body
weight in A. africanus is unlikely to have
exceeded 70 to 80 Ibs. and is quite likely to
have been lower than that. The pygmy
chimpanzee, an African pongid with a mean
body weight of 60 to 80 Ibs., has a brain
volume of just over 300 cm®, The 440 cm?
of A. africanus represents, therefore, a
considerable advance on the ape level.

According to Holloway (1970), the external proportions of the brain are also
different from apes and resemble later
hominids; the parietal lobes were differentially expanded, and the cerebellum more
human in morphology than in living apes.
In A. boisei, according to Tobias (1967)
and Holloway (1970), the parietal lobes
were also expanded, and the cerebellum
man-like in morphology. In other features,
however, “gracile” and “robust” Australopithecines differed in brain morphology as
much as chimp and gorilla differ from each
other (Holloway, 1970).

Thus, the evidence suggests that considerable internal reorganization of the
brain, with consequent relative expansion,
had already occurred by 2.5 to three million

adaptive process in
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 19, No. 2 Adaptive Hominid Response 123

million
years

O a

en
?
|
|

?
J
!

. L
Aa Australopithecus Australopithecus
Garis boisei
J
? ?
{ [
_ A. africanus A, robustus

\
\
\
\
1
\
\
|
\
\
\
|
|

{

6 
ome oes | eee

Fic. 2—Tentative taxonomic and phylogenetic scheme for species of Australopithecus.

years ago. If Lovejoy and Heiple (1970)
are right, by that time hominids were good
bipeds; certainly, the four million-year-old
humeral fragment of what is probably a
“robust” Australopithecine discovered at
Kanapoi in Kenya (Patterson and Howells,
1967) indicates that hominids had ceased

to be either arm-swingers or knucklewalkers at least four million years ago
(Patterson, Behrensmeyer, and Sill, 1970).

In a little-known piece of work, Mann
(1969) has analyzed maturation patterns
of Australopithecus and attempted to estimate age at death utilizing dental criteria.

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

124. Pilbeam

He shows convincingly that Pliocene hominids matured late, like the living ones,
and did not follow the faster pattern of the
apes. Thus, these early hominids had extended periods of infancy and adolescence
in which to play and learn. The length of
learning time available to them suggests
that they were learning in a cultural way;
that is, their behavior would have been
shaped by essentially arbitrary rules,
norms, and values. I also think it likely
that such learning might have been
achieved, at least in part, linguistically.

To sum up, I believe that the Australopithecines were, in many features, a good
deal more man-like than many of us previously thought. In passing it is worth
noting that their evolution from a pongid
ancestor as recently as four to eight million
years ago must have been quite rapid. Also,
it seems possible that the shift to formalized tool-making followed after some brain
reorganization and other changes; these
in turn were probably related to the
evolution of language, possibly correlated
with a shift to hunting. This view, of
course, merely reaffirms what Darwin
(1871, p. 132) said about language a hundred years ago:

Through [man’s] powers of intellect,
articulate language has been evolved; and
on this his wonderful advancement has
mainly depended.

Before leaving these very man-like Australopithecines, I want to discuss briefly
their taxonomy. Recently, considerable
amounts of heat have been generated
about the number of lineages of Plio-Pleistocene hominids. An increasing number of
workers have argued that all these forms
constitute one variable species, the “robust” ones presumably being the males
and the more “gracile” ones, females. Thus,
Brace, Nelson, and Korn (1971, p. 6)
argue as follows:

Tt was long assumed that there were two

Social Biology

major groups of Australopithecines, a smallsized and a large-sized one. However, the
averages of measurable dimensions from
sites which have been regarded as containing only small specimens differ little from
averages from sites supposedly containing
only large ones.

The misconception that the specimens
from one site are characterized as being
large in contrast with those from another
site is held principally because of the nature of the few well preserved (but unfortunately divergent) examples usually
pictured. It now appears quite likely that
at any one time there was only one...
species of Australopithecine, within which
there may have been more pronounced
variations in size and robustness between
males and females . . . than has been true
for more recent hominids.

This comment applies only to the South
African material. Wolpoff (1968, 1970)
has also argued in favor of the single
species hypothesis by attempting to demonstrate that Telanthropus at Swartkrans
is a small A. robustus. That problem is
difficult to resolve because of the scrappy
nature of the material; but some very
competent workers are convinced that two
species are present at Swartkrans (Clarke,
Howell, and Brain, 1970).

The argument purporting to demonstrate that only one hominid species lived
at any one time revolves around the following sequence of ideas (Wolpoff, 1968).

1. Living hominids have a “cultural” eco
logical niche which, because of the
“competitive exclusion principle,” is so
broad as to preclude the existence of
more than one species.

2. Australopithecines made tools and were

therefore “cultural.”

3. Therefore, there could only have been

one species of Azstralopithecus at any
one time.

Wolpoff (1968, p. 480) has written, “Even
if distinct hominid species arose through
isolation, one or the other must (my italics) soon become extinct because of the
nature of the hominid cultural adaptation.”

If only one hominid species existed at

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 19, No. 2

any one time, at least in East Africa in
the earliest Pleistocene, that species must
have subsumed an enormous range of variation. Brace, Nelson, and Korn (1971,

Adaptive Hominid Response

125

male gorilla, it would be almost impossible
to find two as different in cheek tooth size,
shape, or morphology as hominids 5 and
16 (Figure 3). But that is not all. We can

rill ee &@ 26 904 oe . esses @ « os
Go . a 20
Gorilla 9 eessece @ J osoosee e PY ar)
500 600 700 800 900 1000 1100 mm?
Olduvai e °
167-19 16
mil.

Tooth area P2M’

Fic, 3.—Maxillary cheek tooth areas in male and female gorillas compared with areas in homi
nids 5 and 16 from Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania.

p. 6) attempt to explain this in the following way:

The male-female contrast in robustness and

muscularity is much greater in the gorilla

than it is in modern man. We have reason
to believe . . . that among the earliest men

. . . the contrast in robustness . . . was

greater than is true for more recent men.

This fact leads us to suspect that specimens

which have sometimes been given different

genus and species names may simply have
been male and female members of the same
early population.

In body and brain size, cranial morphology, and tooth and jaw size one can find
no greater degree of sexual dimorphism
among living hominids than in the gorilla.
However, I would argue that A. boisei and
A, habilis, for example, are a good deal
more different than are male and female
gorillas. Take hominids 5 (A. botset) and
16 (A. hkabilis) from Olduvai, both dated
from the period 1.7 to 1.9 million years
(Howell, 1971), and examine their dentitions. (An equally good example would be
hominid 13 from Olduvai [A. dabdilis] and
the Peninj mandible [A. boisei], both
around 1.6 million years old.) If one were
to pick, at random, one male and one fe
be fairly sure, from other evidence, that
the species from which hominid 16 is sampled had a mean brain volume of over
600 cm*, Hominid 5 had a volume of a
little over 500 cm®. If, on cheek tooth size,
hominid 16 is a female, why the larger
brain volume than in the “male”? Why
should external brain morphologies differ?
Why also should hominid 16 have larger
incisors and canines than hominid 5?

It is possible to calculate the relative
probabilities of sampling hominids 5 and
16 from populations with various different
hypothetical parameters, and it is very improbable indeed that they were sampled
from a species which had a degree or
kind of sexual dimorphism equivalent to
those of any living primate. These sorts of
calculations can be performed for a variety
of other East African specimens, with similar results. For these, and other reasons,
I would reject the single species hypothesis,

To sum up, I believe that hominids
diverged from pongids more than ten million years ago, quite likely for reasons unrelated to bipedalism, or weapon use. I
also think it probable that in the future

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

126 Pilbeam

we shall shift our attention somewhat
away from tool making, as the important
factor in human evolution, toward social
communication and cultural behavior in
general, and vocal language in particular.
Finally, it seems probable that, for at least
part of our evolutionary history, two manlike species did coexist.

I am reminded here of what Thomas
Henry Huxley once said of Herbert
Spencer. Spencer’s idea of a tragedy, observed Huxley, was a beautiful theory
slain by an ugly fact. All of us, paleontologists, neontologists, biochemists, and
geneticists, have had our share of such
tragedies; and, to be sure, they are not
over yet.

REFERENCES

BisHop, W. W., and G. R. CHapman. 1970.
Early Pliocene sediments and fossils from the
nothern Kenya Rift Valley. Nature 226:914-—
918.

BisHopr, W. W., and J. A. Miter. Calibration of
hominoid evolution. Scottish Academic Press,
in press.

Bisnor, W. W., J. A. Mructer, and F. J. Fircs.
1969. New  potassium-argon determinations
relevant to the Miocene fossil mammal sequence in East Africa, Amer. J. Sci. 267:669699.

Brace, C. L., H. Netson, and N. Korn. 1971
Atlas of fossil man. Holt, Rinehart, New York.

CrarkE, B. 1970. Darwinian evolution of proteins.
Science 168:1009-1011.

CrarkeE, R. J., F. C. Howert, and C. K. Brat.
1970. More evidence of an advanced hominid
at Swartkrans. Nature 225:1219~-1222.

Corsmy, K. W., and T. Uzzerr. 1970. Natural
selection and mutation rates in mammals.
Amer. Natur. 104:37-53.

Conroy, G. C., and J. G. FLEActe. Locomotor
behavior in living and fossil pongids. Nature,
in press.

Curtis, H. Garwniss, and Ricwarp L. Hay.
Further geological studies and potassium-argon
dating at Olduvai Gorge and Ngorongoro
Crater. In W. W. Bishop and J. A. Miller
(eds.), Calibration of hominoid evolution,
Scottish Academic Press, in press.

Darwin, Cuartes. 1871. The descent of man and
Selection in relation to sex. Appletons, New
York.

Gentry, A. W. 1970. The Bovidae (Mammalia)
of the Fort Ternan fossil fauna, p. 243-323. In
L. S. B. Leakey and R. J. G. Savage, Fossil
vertebrates of Africa, Vol. IT. Academic Press,
New York,

Social Biology

Goopman, M. 1961. The role of immunological
differences in the phyletic development of
human behavior. Hum. Biol. 33:131-162.

Goopman, M., Barnapas, J., Matsupa, G., and
G. W. Moore. 1971. Molecular evolution in the
descent of man. Nature 233:604~613.

Herrre, K. G., and C. O. Lovejoy. 1971. The
distal femoral anatomy of Australopithecus.
Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 35:75~—84.

Hottoway, Rarpw L. 1970. New endocranial
values for the Australopithecines. Nature 227:
199-200.

Howerr, F. C. 1971. Pliocene/Pleistocene
Hominidae in Eastern Africa: Absolute and
relative ages. In W. W. Bishop and J. A.
Miller (eds.), Calibration of hominoid evolution. Scottish Academic Press, in press.

Isaac, G, L. R. E. F. Leaxey, and A. K.
BEHRENSMEYER. 1971. Archeological traces of
early hominid activities, east of Lake Rudolf,
Kenya. Science 173:1129-1134.

JoLty, CxiirForp J. 1970a. The seed-eaters: A
new model of hominid differentiation based on
a baboon analogy. Man 5:5-26.

. 19706. Hadropithecus: A lemuroid smallobject feeder. Man 5:619-626.

Krarura, M. 1968. Evolutionary rates at the
molecular level. Nature 217:624-626.

Kivc, J. L., and T. H. Juxes. 1969. Non-Darwinian evolution. Science 164:788-798.

Koune, D. E. 1970. Evolution of higher-organism DNA. Quant. Rev. Biophys. 3:327-375.

Leakey, L. S. B. 1962. A new Lower Pliocene
fossil primate from Kenya. Ann. Mag. Nat.
Hist. (Series 13) 4:689-697.

. 1967. An early Miocene member of
Hominidae. Nature 213:155-163.

Lewis, O. J., 1971. Brachiation and the early
evolution of the Hominoidea. Nature 230:577
9.

Loveyoy, C. D., and K. G. Herere. 1970. A
reconstruction of the femur of Australopithecus
africanus. Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 32:33-40.

Mann, A. E, 1969. The paleodemography of
Australopithecus. University Microfilms, Ann
Arbor.

Napier, J. R., and P. R. Davis. 1959. The forelimb skeleton and associated remains of Proconsul africanus, p. 69. In Fossil mammals of
Africa, No. 16. Brit. Mus. Nat. Hist., London.

Patterson, B., A. K. BEHRENSMEYER, and W. D.
Sizt. 1970. Geology and fauna of a new
Pliocene locality in north-western Kenya.
Nature 226:918-921.

PATTERSON, B., and W. W. Howetts. 1967.
Hominid humeral fragment from early Pleistocene of Northwestern Kenya. Science 156:
64-66.

Pmsram, Davm. 1968. The earliest hominids.
Nature 219:1335-1338.

. 1969. Tertiary Pongidae of East Africa:

Relationships and taxonomy. Peabody Mus.

Bull, 31:185.

. 1970. Gigantopithecus and the origins of
Hominidae. Nature 225:516-519.

PirgeAM, Davip, and E. L. Srmons. 1971.
Humerus of Dryopithecus from Saint Gaudens,
France. Nature 229:408~409.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

Ricumonp, R. C. 1970. Non-Darwinian evolution: A critique. Nature 225:1025-1028.

Rosinson, J. T. 1954. The genera and species of
the Australopithecinae, Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 12:181-200.

. 1971. Variation and the taxonomy of the
early hominids, p. 123-155. In P. Dolhinow
and V. M. Sarich (ed.), Background for man.
Little, Brown, Boston.

SaricH, V. M. 1971. A molecular approach to
the question of human origins, p. 60-81. In P.
Dolhinow and V. M. Sarich (eds.), Background for man. Little, Brown, Boston.

Stmons, E. L. 1968. A source for dental comparison of Ramapithecus with Australopithecus
and Homo. So. Afr. J. Sci. 64:92-112.

Stmmons, E. L., Davm Prmseam, and P. C.
ETTELL. 1969. Controversial taxonomy of fossil
hominids. Science 166:258~259.

Stsons, E. L., Davm Pivpeam, and S. Boyer.
1971. Appearance of Hipparion in the Tertiary
of the Siwalik Hills of North India. Nature
229:408-409.

 

Adaptive Hominid Response

127

TATTERSALL, J. 1969. Ecology of North Indian
Ramapithecus. Nature 221:451-452.

Tosias, P. V. 1967. The cranium and maxillary
dentition of Australopithecus (Zinjanthropus)
boisei. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

TuTTLe, R. M. 1969, Knuckle-walking and the
problem of human origins. Science 166:953~
961.

Uzzett, Tom, and Davi PrseamM. Phyletic
divergence dates of hominoid primates: A
comparison of fossil and molecular data. Evolution, in press.

WasupBurn, S. L. 1971. The study of human
evolution, p. 82-117, In P. Dolhinow and V. M.
Sarich (eds.), Background for man. Little,
Brown, Boston.

Wotprorr, M. H., 1968. “Telanthropus” and the
single species hypothesis. Amer. Anthrop. 70:
477-493.

. 1970. The evidence for multiple hominid

taxa at Swartkrans. Amer. Anthrop. 72:576
607.

 

 
