Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Master's level training in data management in the
health sciences

To cite this article: (1974) Master's level training in data management in the health sciences,
Social Biology, 21:1, 96-97, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1974.9988094

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1974.9988094

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lil Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Communications

Human Biology Council

A number of North American human
biologists met in April, 1973, and initiated
the formation of an organization for the
purpose of supporting the journal Human
Biology and nominating its editors.

Therefore, the Human Biology Council
to advance the science of human biology,
through advice to and support of Human
Biology and other relevant publications,
and through promotion of research and
teaching concerning human biological variation, has now been established.

Members for 1974 will be considered
Charter Members. Scholars and students
who wish to join should write to the
chairman pro-tem, Dr. Paul Baker (Department of Anthropology, 511 Social
Science Building, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania
16802), and should summarize their qualifications. Student membership is for a

Master’s Level Training in Data

 

period of not more than 3 years and
applications must include a statement from
a professor who can vouch for the status
as a student.

Dues for 1974 are $10.00 for regular
members and $6.00 for student members.
Dues include subscription to the quarterly
journal Human Biology. Checks should be
made out to the “Human Biology Council”
and may be sent with applications to
Dr. Paul Baker, chairman of the Organizing Committee, who will arrange the review
of applications and will forward dues payments to the acting treasurer, Dr. Michael
A. Little.

Donations to help cover the organizing
expenses will be appreciated. Arrangements
are being made to suitably recognize supporting members and benefactors and to
gain tax exempt status.

Management in the Health Sciences

The Department of Biostatistics at the
University of North Carolina in Chapel
Hill now offers one-year programs of study
leading to either the Master of Public
Health (MPH) or the Master of Science
in Public Health (MSPH) degree in Biostatistics with special emphasis on management of computer-based health data

96

systems. Graduates will be prepared for
work in intermediate level statistical and/
or computer systems analyst positions in
local, state, federal or private health programs for the delivery and evaluation of
health services.

In addition to an introduction to health
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 21, No. 1

programs, the curriculum includes: methods for the collection and processing of
different types of record files and large
data sets, sample survey methods, introduction to research and experimental design, data analysis, and techniques of
program evaluation. Admission to both
programs requires a bachelor’s degree.
Calculus background is desirable for the
MPH;; it is required for MSPH admission.

Communications 97

Students lacking adequate background
in computer sciences will be expected to
attend the basic computer sciences course
during the second summer session in July
and August preceding entry into the program. For details contact: Dr. E. C.
Coulter, Department of Biostatistics,
School of Public Health, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27514.

Advanced Study Program in International Nutrition Planning

The Massachusetts Institute of Technology International Nutrition Planning
Program, in collaboration with the Center
for Advanced Engineering Study, will
initiate in September, 1974, a special ninemonth Advanced Study Program for Fellows in International Nutrition Planning.

The program is designed primarily for
officials of governments and international
agencies who are involved in or likely to
become involved in the planning, implementation, or evaluation of programs designed to combat malnutrition in low
income countries.

A small number of persons will be accepted each year for this nondegree program and will undertake a program
designed to supplement existing talents

 

and experience, whether in public health,
finance and economics, or administration.
Among potentially relevant subjects are
development economics, human nutrition,
quantitative methods and data analysis,
health services administration, and regionoriented political development. The program is limited to individuals able to meet
certain entrance requirements, including
fluency in English, and who are sponsored
by their respective organizations or governments and can demonstrate that they
have adequate financial support.

For further information on the program,
write: Dr. John O. Field, Advanced Study
Program, International Nutrition Planning
Program, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 30 Wadsworth St. (E53-465),
Cambridge, Mass. 02139.
