Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

New fossil evidence for the evolution of man

Richard E. Leakey

To cite this article: Richard E. Leakey (1972) New fossil evidence for the evolution of man,
Social Biology, 19:2, 99-114, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987976

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987976

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB arr | ei
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 6
N
Q View related articles 4

wa Citing articles: 5 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:32

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

 

New Fossil Evidence for the Evolution

of Man

Richard E. Leakey

The National Museum
Nairobi, Kenya

The East Rudolf locality is broadly detailed in Figure 1 and can be seen as approximately seven hundred square miles
lying to the east of Lake Rudolf in northern
Kenya. The area may be further defined as
falling between latitude 3° 45’ and 4° 20’
N., bounded to the west by the lake and
to the east by longitude 36° 25’E. The
locality has been subdivided into several
geographical areas; Heret to the north and
Koobi Fora to the south with a volcanic
complex of basalts providing a convenient
separation between the two. A more
southerly area, Kubi Algi, has also been
worked, and while this is of considerable
interest it has not yielded hominid remains
to date and will therefore be left out of
this report.

Several preliminary reports on the geology of the three areas have already been
published (Behrensmeyer, 1970; Vondra
et al., 1971), but it is premature yet to
consider the geological context of the
hominid discoveries as finalized. Indeed,
each field program since 1968 has shed new
light upon previous interpretations and in
part, because of this, I feel it pertinent to
take this opportunity to correct an erroneous provisional interpretation of the
stratigraphic correlation between TIleret

 

and Koobi Fora. It was originally suggested
(Leakey, 1970) that the two hominid skulls
(FS~158, KNM-ER 406, and FS-210,
KNM-ER 407) collected in the Ileret
area in 1969 could be stratigraphically
placed in a sequence of beds that were
referred to as the Koobi Fora IIA member.
From this, it was further suggested that
these skulls were from a level which was
below a dated horizon of 2.6 million years.
We now know that this provisional correlation was incorrect; the sequence of deposits
are not stratigraphically equivalent to
Koobi Fora ITA although lithologically they
are very similar. The date for the two skulls
is therefore not known, but subsequent detailed geological work has established a
more accurate picture, and current interpretation of the total evidence indicates that
these two skulls are likely to be no older
than an approximate two million years.

GEOLOGY

Without going into too much detail, I
feel that it would be useful to present the
up-to-date geological background to the
superb collection of fossil hominids and
other fossil vertebrates. The provenance
of each fossil hominid specimen has now
been marked by a concrete post. The

99
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

 

100 Leakey Social Biology

ethiopia

Gisland

LAKE nderati

° wells
RUDOLF
KUBI
ALG!

central

O island

WW) sediments
volcanics

 

Fic. 1—Map of East Rudolf.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

stratigraphic relationship of widely separated localities has not yet been finalized,
but with the conclusion of the 1971 expedition a general relationship can now be
presented. Detailed collection of faunal
material by Dr. V. Maglio has greatly
assisted with the problem of internal correlation between the various collecting areas,
and this palaeontological evidence has provided a valuable independent check on the
stratigraphic interpretation.

The majority of the hominid fossils has
been collected from the Ileret area which is
comprised of several quite well-defined geological units (Vondra et al., 1971). The
lower unit of the Teret sequence (Figure
2) consists of predominantly fluvial deposits which are characterized by interbedded flood basin mudstones, channels,
and subarkoses, with two tuffaceous horizons that provide convenient local stratigraphic markers within the unit. The lower
unit is capped by a tuff which contains
pumice nodules and from these, sanidine
crystals have been obtained for radiometric age determinations. Results available at present indicate a probable age of
1~-1.5 million years for this capping horizon
and in the event that further investigations
confirm this, all of the hominid remains
mentioned are of a greater age, being stratigraphically below this horizon. It should
be noted here that palaeontological evidence supports the tentative date for the
top of the lower unit at Tleret.

The stratigraphic position of the various
hominid finds from Ileret and Koobi Fora
are shown in Figure 2, and the tentative
relationship of the Ileret sequence to the
Koobi Fora sequence.

It is seen in Figure 2 that the lower part
of the Koobi Fora sequence is capped by
a locally evident tuff which is stratigraphically below the Ileret sequence. The tuff
(designated KBS) that marks the upper
limit of the lower unit of the Koobi Fora

New Fossil Evidence

101

succession has yielded a number of pumice
nodules from which sanidine crystals have
been extracted and used for radiometric age
determinations, The date obtained, 2.61 =
0.26 million years, has been obtained by
Fitch and Miller (1970) who considered
it to be a very reasonable age for the
pumice. The nature of the tuffaceous
horizon indicates the likelihood that this
age also dates the tuff, and furthermore,
faunal evidence from immediately below
and above the tuff is not inconsistent with
this age. It is important to note that no
hominid fossils have been located below the
2.61 million years horizon, but there are
several occurrences of artifacts within the
tuff indicating the presence of hominids in
the area at that time.

The lowest part of the Koobi Fora succession consists of lacustrine deposits:
clays, sandstones, and siltstones. Vertebrate
fossils are not common except for aquatic
forms. This lacustrine phase is overlaid by
a fluvial series which includes a number of
palaeosols, mudstones, silts, subarkoses,
and the previously mentioned KBS tuff.
These fluvial deposits often contain good
concentrations of vertebrate fossils, many
of which are beautifully preserved and remarkably complete. There is a marked
regional disconformity in the lower part
of the fluvial succession, above which the
fluvial deposits grade into lacustrine sediments with quite marked lateral variations
to the lithology. The upper part of the
Koobi Fora succession is equally variable
in its lithology, but includes algal beds and
stromatolites, sandstones, and various conglomeratic horizons. A prominent tuff occurs towards the upper part of the sequence, and although this has not yet been
dated, the feature is of importance as a
local marker bed to which various fossil
finds can be related stratigraphically.

Faunal evidence suggests that the Koobi
Fora sequence can best be considered as
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

102 Leakey Social Biology

UPPER TUFF
1-0 —1T-Sm.y.

«A

<—B

Cc
+ MIDDLE TUFF

1 <—D

 

UPPER TUFF
= EF ower TuFF -u
<-G
Pe KBS TUFF
2-émy
ILERET
lower
unit
KOOBI FORA

Fic. 2.—Generalized stratigraphic sections of the lower unit of the Ileret sedimentary sequence
(left) and the Koobi Fora sedimentary sequence (right). The probable correlation between the two
is indicated. The stratigraphic position of the hominid specimens is indicated as follows: A= KNMER 725, 726, 727, 728, 731, 739, 740, 741, 801, 802, 805, 818, 819, 992, 993; B= KNM-ER 404; C=
KNM-ER 729; D=KNM-ER 733, 803, 806, 807, 808, 809, 820; E— KNM-ER 727; F = KNMER 406, 732, 815; G= KNM-ER 407; H=KNM-ER 403, 730, 734, 736, 737; I= KNM-ER 164,
405, 417, 738, 810, 811, 812, 813, 814, 816.

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

two major units, the lower unit ending at
the disconformity immediately above the
artifact-bearing KBS tuff which has been
dated at 2.6 million years, and the upper
unit consisting of all the deposits above it
except for the unconformable Holocene
sediments that outcrop in various localities
along the Koobi Fora ridge. Although much
research is necessary, a possible chronological correlation can be drawn between
the uppermost tuff in the Koobi Fora
sequence and the middle tuff in the lower
unit of the Ileret sequence (Figure 2).
Some of the Ileret material may in fact be
slightly younger, but there cannot be much
time separating the two and the fauna
from both areas have many common
aspects.

The hominid remains from East Rudolf
are of considerable interest. Although
further research is necessary, present indications are that all of the material is of a
Lower Pleistocene age, with a probable
range of between one and two million
years, and the collections from Koobi Fora
and Ileret are roughly within the same
broad period of time. Associated faunal
evidence indicates that the hominids from
the lower portion of the lower unit of the
Ileret sequence are likely to be contemporaneous with the hominid specimens from
the middle unit of the Koobi Fora sequence. Similarly, the hominid material
from the middle of the lower unit at Ileret
is broadly contemporaneous with the material from the upper unit of the Koobi
sequence. The hominid material from the
upper portion of the lower unit of the Jleret
sequence is thus likely to be more recent
than any of the hominid specimens from the
Koobi Fora sequence.

Sufficient data is now available to consider possible evolutionary trends within
the hominid populations at East Rudolf.
However, the intention of this paper is to
present the material itself, much of which

New Fossil Evidence

103

has been discovered within the past eighteen
months and is thus only published in a
preliminary report or has not yet been published. Quite apart from this consideration,
the study of trends will be of greater
significance when the detailed stratigraphy
of the localities has been worked out and
when a series of horizons within the East
Rudolf formations have been dated by
radioisotopic means.

AUSTRALOPITHECINE MATERIAL FROM
EAST RUDOLF

The collection of Australopithecine material includes both cranial and postcranial
specimens, In the case of the latter, the
inclusion of the various limb parts listed
in Table 1 is provisional and is based upon
size, morphological characters, and comparisons with other Pleistocene hominid
postcranial remains. Until such time as
more complete specimens are found associated directly with cranial remains, there
will always be some doubt of the identification of an isolated limb fragment from the
Lower Pleistocene.

Preliminary reports on specimens listed
in Table 1 which have Kenya National
Museum accession numbers of less than
800 have already been published (Leakey,
1970, 1971). In addition, more detailed
accounts of these specimens are given by
Leakey, Mungal, and Walker (1971).

The specimens listed in Table 1 appear
to represent one population that existed
within the East Rudolf area for a continuous period. Although absolute dating of
the various horizons has yet to be completed, stratigraphic and faunal evidence
points to the probability that the sampling
of the hominid population extends over a
period of time of probably between five
hundred thousand and a million years. A
feature of general interest is that specimens from the lower levels show a very
similar morphology to specimens from the
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

104 Leakey

Social Biology

TABLE 1

AUSTRALOPITHECINE SPECIMENS COLLECTED FroM East Rupo Fr, 1968-1971

Specimen No.

Area KNM-ER Description
Cranial

Koobi Fora .......... 405 palate, lacking dentition

Tleret ............-... 406 complete cranium, lacking dentition

LSE sussex on oememnem 407 cranial vault, lacking facial and maxillary regions

Koobi Fora .......... 417 parietal fragment

MQVGE censuses ua os nes 732 demi-cranium, missing basi-occipital region

Teret aos cg ven va ww pan 733 cranial fragments including frags. of maxilla frontal, parietal
and mandible

Koobi Fora .......... 814 crania] fragments

Koobi Fora .......... 403 rt. mandibular corpus, fragmented dentition

Theoret oss w.ce nt esenns 404 rt. mandibular corpus, fragmented dentition

Tleret 2.2 ...ccceenees 725 It. mandibular corpus, lacking dentition

Tleret .........02000. 726 It. mandibular corpus, lacking dentition

Tleret ............... 727 rt. mandibular corpus, lacking dentition

Tleret .........00005- 728 rt. mandibular corpus, lacking dentition

Tleret oo... eee eee eee 729 mandible with rt. P* and M®, and It. P?, P4, M?, and M2

Tleret .........-2.00- 801 rt. mandibular corpus with M3 and M2

Teel soscne pene eeaus 805 frag. It. mandibular corpus lacking dentition

Koobi Fora .......... 810 It. mandibular corpus through the symphysis and with M3

Koobi Fora .......... 812 It. mandibular corpus, immature with some permanent teeth
visible in the crypts

Wleyet passcane vw secee 818 It. mandibular corpus with dentition

Tevet. ss wsaussasscass 819 frag. It. mandibular corpus lacking dentition

Teret. soca cc sseeenans 802 isolated teeth

Koobi Fora .......... 816 isolated upper left canine

Koobi Fora .......... 736 It. femoral diaphysis

Postcranial

Koobi Fora .......... 738 Jt. femur with prox. end, lacks lower portion of diaphysis and
distal epiphysis

Tleret ...... eee eee 739 rt. humerus lacking prox. epiphysis

Tleret 22... ee eee ee 740 frag. distal epiphysis of left humerus

Tleret 2... .. eee e noes 741 It. tibia lacking distal half of diaphysis and distal epiphysis

Tleret ...... cece eeeee 815 frag. of prox. end of left femur, lacking head

Koobi Fora .......... 813 rt. talus and frag. tibia shaft

Tleret oo... eee eee eee 993 rt. femur diaphysis with distal epiphysis

uppermost part of the sequence. From this,
one might infer that the collection from
East Rudolf as listed in Table 1 can be
treated as a stable population despite the
passage of time and that any differences
between individual specimens can be considered as parameters of variability within
a species. Until further evidence comes
forward, I propose to discuss the Australopithecine material from East Rudolf as a
single species and remark upon various
characteristics that are of particular interest and which might be of importance to a
better interpretation of the Lower Pleistocene hominids of Africa.

 

 

CRANIAL REMAINS

Of the cranial specimens, the virtually
complete skull KNM-ER 406 (FS-158 in
Leakey, 1970) is perhaps the most impressive. The specimen demonstrates typical
features of the genus Australopithecus as
defined by Tobias (1967) (see Figure 3).
The marked robusticity of the skulls, the
powerful development of a sagittal crest,
the prominent and characteristic morphology of the supraorbital tori, details of the
basicranium, and the development of
heavily pneumatized mastoid processes all
point to the close similarity between the
two specimens. The evidence is such that it

 

 
32 08 December 2015

] at 13:

igan

ity of Michi

1versl

Downloaded by [Un

 

Vol. 19, No. 2 New Fossil Evidence 105

 

CMS

Fic. 3.—The large robust cranium KNM-ER 406 (above) compared with the smaller glacile cranium KNM-ER 732.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

106 Leakey

is most likely that the Rudolf material will
be referred to the Olduvai species, although
it is perhaps premature to assign specific
identification in the absence of further
specimens from the type locality.

The two other skulls are of considerable
interest. The demi-cranium KNM-ER 732
(Leakey, 1971) lacks the basioccipital
region and the left side of the skull is
essentially missing, while the specimen
KNM-ER 407 (FS-210 in Leakey, 1970),
consists of a virtually complete cranial
vault with the supraorbital tori and the
anterior portion of the skull missing. The
latter specimen, which was originally somewhat distorted, has recently been cleaned
and reconstructed by R. Clark. The similarities between this specimen and the
demi-cranium KNM-ER 732 are now very
apparent and make its inclusion in the
genus Australopithecus reasonable.

The two specimens demonstrate many
characters which are seen in the large
skull KNM-ER 406; the most striking
contrast is one of robusticity. The two
skulls are more gracile and lack a sagittal
crest and other prominent muscle attachments which are so well developed in the
larger skull. The estimated endocranial
capacities are not available at present, but
the size of the cranial vault of the two
specimens indicates that the difference
would be of a small order of magnitude.
The evidence supports the concept that
the two smaller skulls represent the same
species as the larger cranium and that
sexual dimorphism is a probable reason for
the superficial and size differences which
can be documented.

The associated cranial and mandibular
fragments KNM-ER 733, the very
weathered palate KNM-ER 405, and the
fragments KNM-ER 814 provide some
additional evidence, particularly for the
concept that there was little morphological

Social Biology

change between the early and the later
specimens in the East Rudolf collection.
The mandibular remains provide a good
representative sample upon which various
studies can be made. The morphology of
the horizontal ramus is remarkably consistent, showing heavy construction throughout all the sample specimens. One of the
more complete specimens, KNM-ER 729,
is illustrated in Fig. 4. Unfortunately, many
examples are weathered and lack the
crowns of the teeth. In these specimens,
some information can be obtained from the
remaining roots. The range of size shown in
the series demonstrate clearly the fact that
there was considerable variability within
the population and that caution must be
exercised when dealing with small samples
or individual specimens of Lower Pleistocene hominids. The series includes some
relatively small mandibles and some very
large ones with a number of intermediate
sizes. This point is illustrated in Figure 5.
The mandibular material tends to confirm the interpretation based on the skull
fragments inasmuch as it is evident that
the East Rudolf population of Avzstralopithecus demonstrates a wide range of
variability in size. Sexual dimorphism is a
factor which must be considered as causing
much of this variability. The consistent
evidence of similar basic morphological
traits throughout the series supports the
hypothesis that there was a single species
of Australopithecus at East Rudolf and, as
has already been stated, there is no apparent pattern which might indicate either
a size increase through the succession or
conversely a size decrease. In every specimen where the anterior region of the mandible has been preserved, the reduced size of
the incisors (indicated by the very small
space between the canines in the specimens
in which the incisors are missing), and to
a slightly lesser extent the reduced size of

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2 New Fossil Evidence

 

0 5
Deceased epemememaiasenemescemiones sammie)

CMS
Fic. 4—Occlusal view of the Australopithecus mandible KNM-~ER 729.

 

107

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

108 Leakey Social Biology
4
> ° 0
£ 35
al
=
QO
— 30
>
25

35 40

DEPTH

 

45 20 55

(mm.)

Fic. 5.—Graph to illustrate the range of variability in the width and depth of the mandibular corpus among the East Rudolf Australopithecine material. Both measurements were taken vertically be
low a point between M1! and M?,

the canines, is very striking and is clearly
an important character of this species. This
reduction of the anterior dentition is very
marked in the larger individuals which also
show a striking development of the molars
and the premolars. There is an indication
that the relative proportions of the anterior
to posterior teeth varies between the very
large individuals and smaller examples of
the same population, but additional specimens are required to fully confirm this
suggestion. A graph illustrating the relative development of the posterior dentition,
and the reduced size of the anterior dentition in the mandible KNM-ER 729 compared with the condition in the hominine
mandible KNM-ER 992 is shown in
Figure 6.

Another feature of some importance is
the fact that the upper anterior dentition,
in common with other higher primates, appears to be proportionately larger than
the lower dentition. The square outline of
the alveolar margin of the palate, with a
relatively large space between the incisors
for the incisal roots, contrasts quite markedly with the V-shaped mandibular form,
suggesting that the upper incisors were
distinctly wider than their lower counterparts. This characteristic is certainly not
unique to the Australopithecines, but is
quite often overlooked and is of particular
significance to the study and interpretation
of isolated teeth which form a significant
proportion of some collections of early
hominids from Africa.

 

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 19, No. 2

20

omnf
On

LENGTH (mm.)

1, lo C

New Fossil Evidence

109

 

Ps Py My Mo M3

Fic. 6.—Graph to illustrate the reduced anterior dentition and the enlarged posterior dentition in
Australopithecus relative to the condition in Homo. The almost complete Australopithecus mandible
KNM-ER 729, represented by closed circles, is compared with the almost complete Homo mandible,

KNM-ER 992, represented by closed stars.

POSTCRANIAL REMAINS

Postcranial remains from the East Rudolf
area are not common but quite a large
sample has been collected. Although positive taxonomic identification is impossible
at present, a number of features point to
the strong probability that the specimens
listed in this report are correctly placed
within the sample of Australopithecine
material.

There are four femoral fragments listed,

one of which, KNM-ER 736, is a very
robust shaft lacking both the distal and
proximal portions. Two other pieces give
some information on the proximal region:
KNM-ER 738 which is small but exhibits
a long neck and a small head, both characters which are shown in femoral fragments
known from the South African Australopithecines; and KNM-ER 815, which exhibits a long neck, and a very marked
antero-posterior compression of the neck

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

110 Leakey

and of the proximal portion of the shaft
that is preserved in the specimen. Similar
features can be observed in the femoral
fragment H.20 from Olduvai (Day, 1969).
The fourth specimen, KNM-ER 993, consists of the distal epiphysis and approximately two-thirds of the shaft. The
condyles are heavily weathered, but some
morphological information remains. The
two specimens with reasonably complete
portions of the shaft preserved indicate a
short robust femur, contrasting with the
long and more slender condition seen in the
genus Homo.

The half-tibia KNM-ER 741 is the only
example of an Australopithecine tibia. This
consists of the proximal epiphysis and a
little less than half of the shaft. The specimen exhibits a number of interesting
morphological features such as considerable
buttressing of the medial condyle, marked
torsion of the transverse condylar axis in
relation to the shaft, and a pronounced
degree of mesio-lateral compression which
results in a sharp anterior border to the
shaft.

The talus KNM-ER 813 is of considerable interest. However, since it was only
discovered in the past four months, no
studies have been concluded, and it would
be premature to discuss the specimen.

The right humerus KNM-ER 739 consists of a complete distal epiphysis and
shaft; it lacks only the proximal epiphysis.
The specimen is robust, and the muscle attachments are powerfully developed. As in
other postcranial specimens, the humerus
shows a number of important morphological details; but until further examples
are recovered, there is little chance of
being able to draw meaningful conclusions
from the sample of one.

Detailed descriptions of the East Rudolf
Australopithecine postcranial remains have
either been submitted for publication or
will be in the near future. There is no

 

Social Biology

information available on the morphology
of the hands and feet of the East African
Australopithecines. Despite this, the available information on Lower Pleistocene
hominid postcranial material suggests that
locomotor patterns can begin to be studied,
and this will certainly provide important
new evidence on which taxonomic interpretations might be based. As will be seen
later, the East Rudolf cranial material
shows two distinct hominid types, and
postcranial remains confirm cranial evidence
in this respect.

HOMININE MATERIAL FROM
EAST RUDOLF

The collection includes both cranial and
postcranial specimens. The uniformity of
morphological traits within this grouping
and the uniformity within the Australopithecine material is such that I have some
confidence in suggesting taxonomic differences.

As can be seen in Table 2, specimens
have been recovered from both Koobi Fora
and Ileret. The provenance of each specimen
is documented, and it is clear that the hominine form and the Australopithecine form
at East Rudolf are contemporary. Although
the generic term Homo has been argued
against for Lower Pleistocene hominids, the
material from East Rudolf is such that
inclusion within the genus Homo seems
necessary. Unfortunately the Olduvai Homo
habilis material from Bed I is fragmentary

and only partially described; but a close

examination of the Olduvai specimens in
the light of the new material from Rudolf
strengthens the argument for retaining
Homo habilis as a distinct hominid form
that existed within the same environment
and at the same time as Australopithecus
in eastern Africa. In spite of these comments, I feel that it would be inopportune
to refer the East Rudolf specimens to Homo
habilis, and I would rather state that the

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 19, No. 2

New Fossil Evidence

 

lil

TABLE 2

HoMININE SPECIMENS COLLECTED FROM East Ruporr, 1970-1971

Description

It. mandibular corpus through symphysis to region of rt. P4.

Crowns of It. M1-M?

frag. It. mandibular corpus

isolated teeth, two premolars, M!, M? and two M?’s
frag. It. maxilla with M2 and M3

isolated teeth, upper lateral incisor, premolar, and molar
isolated upper molar and tooth frags.

frag. It. mandibular corpus

juvenile mandible, with dentition

almost complete mandible

Specimen No.
Area KNM-ER
Cranial
TGt6E. cscs cscaanasans 164 parietal frag.
Koobi Fora .......... 730
Tleret ....ccccccccces 731
Koobi Fora .........-. 734 parietal fragment
Tleret .. cc cc cce ences 806
Tleret ......c cece cnee 807
Tleret ........cccceee 808
Jleret .... ccc ec cece 809
Koobi Fora .......... 817
Tleret .. cece cece ceee 820
Tleret .....cccccccnee 992
Postcranial
TGC. oa cacewewsaxnes 737 It. femoral diaphysis
Tleret .....ccccceccce 803

frags. of femur, tibia, ulna, fibula, talus, several phalanges, upper

canine and incisor

genus Homo as distinct from Australopithecus is represented by the various specimens listed in Table 2. A preliminary
report on specimens KNM-ER 164, 730,
731, 732, and 734 listed in Table 2 is given
by Leakey (1971).

CRANIAL REMAINS

The three mandibles, KNM-ER 730, 820,
and 992 (Figure 7) are beautifully preserved specimens that demonstrate a series
of morphological characters that argue for
their inclusion within the genus Homo.
The partial mandible KNM-ER 730 has
very worm teeth and this, together with
the well advanced alveolar reabsorption,
suggests that the individual was aged at the
time of death. The mandible exhibits a
distinct U-shaped dental arcade with a
broad symphysial region and a wide intercanine dimension. This suggests relatively
large lower incisors, and the remaining
roots of the canines show that these teeth
were also large relative to the posterior
dentition. The digastric fossae are deep
and well defined, being quite distinct from
the condition in Australopithecine mandibles.

The mandible KNM-ER 992 is also of
a mature individual, but details of the
dental morphology have not been Jost
through heavy wear. The morphological
features seen in KNM-ER 730 are also
present in this specimen, although individual tooth size seems to be a little
smaller.

The juvenile mandible KNM-ER 820
will provide a wealth of information when
studied in detail. The incisors and the first
molars are permanent teeth, while the left
canine and the left and right premolars are
deciduous. The specimen was found in
several pieces so that the crown of the
permanent left canine and the right third
and fourth premolars were visible in their
crypts at the fractures. They were perfectly
formed and clearly ready for eruption at
the time of death.

Other cranial specimens are rather fragmentary, and discussion on these is unwarranted here, except to mention the
maxillary fragment KNM-ER 807 from
Tleret. This specimen has a complete unworn M? in place and the roots and partial
crown of M?. The third molar is appreciably smaller than the second molar which

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

 

CMS

   

Social Biology

is Papy
Lt

x
ae

Fic. 7.—Occlusal views of the mandibles attributable to the genus Homo. Above left, KNM-ER
730; above right, KNM-ER 992; below, KNM-ER 820.

is itself not a large tooth when compared to
the same teeth in other Australopithecine
specimens from eastern Africa.

The specimens of associated loose teeth,
KNM-ER 806, 808, and 809, from Ileret
are contemporary with the juvenile mandi
ble KNM-ER 820. The teeth show larger
dimensions than those of the mandible,
showing that, as would be expected, individual variations in size are present in
the sample of Homo as they are in other
groups.

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

POSTCRANIAL REMAINS

The postcranial remains attributable to
Homo consist of the left femoral diaphysis
KNM-ER 737 from the Koobi Fora sequence and parts of an associated skeleton,
KNM-ER 803, from the Ileret sequence.
The latter specimen has yet to be described. In view of the fact that there are
a number of parts that will require very
careful study, I propose to avoid a detailed
statement on the material in this paper.
The femoral diaphysis KNM-ER 737 is
remarkably similar to the femoral diaphysis
of the KNM-ER 803 collection and both
are quite distinct from the four femoral
pieces mentioned previously and referred
to Australopithecus. The tibial diaphysis
of the KNM-ER 803 material is similarly
very different in morphological character
to the tibia KNM-ER 741, but it does
show affinities towards a tibia from site
FLK I at Olduvai (Davis, 1964) which
Day (1967) suggests could well belong to
Homo habilis.

SUMMARY

Prior to the discovery of the East Rudolf
locality, the only site in East Africa that
had produced a number of Lower Pleistocene hominid fossils was the Olduvai
Gorge, Tanzania. The work at East Rudolf
has provided a sample of more than forty
specimens and these include cranial and
mandibular remains as well as some postcranial material. The prospects of obtaining
additional material from the continuing program at East Rudolf are excellent, and it
is likely that during the next few years new
material will shed light on existing problems and interpretations.

From the results obtained to date, there
seems to be good evidence of a species of
Australopithecus occurring in eastern Africa
during Lower Pleistocene times. The available evidence from East Rudolf indicates
one species of Australopithecus in which

New Fossil Evidence

113

there was significant individual varibility, in part resulting from sexual dimorphism. The material from East Rudolf also
suggests that very little, if any, morphological development occurred in this species
over a period of at least half a million
years duration. This factor may imply
stability resulting from an earlier (PlioPleistocene) period of specialization.

The available postcranial evidence lacks
many elements, but there is already an
indication that the locomotor pattern of
the species was distinctive and perhaps
reflects a particular adaptive response to
a specific ecological situation or niche.
There is a vast area of study to be gone
into before definitive conclusions can be
made, but there is now material available
for such a study and evidence to suggest
that previously held notions on Australopithecine locomotion are subject to review.

The fossil evidence from East Rudolf also
demonstrated the occurrence of the genus
Homo during the Lower Pleistocene times.
The provenance of the various specimens
establishes the fact that a form of the genus
Homo was living contemporaneously and in
the same geographical region with a species
of the genus Australopithecus. The fossils
show that the two groups were distinct
both in cranial and postcranial morphology.
Further research on both groups may provide information on adaptive responses over
a period of time and such evidence will
certainly help with the eventual understanding of the evolutionary relationship of
the two Lower Pleistocene genera.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I would like to thank the Government of
Kenya for permission to carry out the research
at East Rudolf and the Museum Trustees of
Kenya for clearance to publish on the material. The research has been supported by the
National Geographic Society, the William H.
Donner Foundation, and various personal contributions without whose support the present
scope of our knowledge of man’s past would
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

114. Leakey

not be nearly so advanced. I should also like
to express my appreciation to members of the
East Rudolf Expedition who have undertaken
difficult tasks and who are perhaps directly
responsible for many of the finds discussed
in this paper. This is particularly true of my
wife, Dr. Meave Leakey, who has also put in
a great deal of time in assisting me with the
preparation of this paper. To all, I express
sincere thanks.

REFERENCES

BEHRENSMEYER, A. K. 1970. Preliminary geological interpretation of a new hominid site
in the Lake Rudolf Basin. Nature (Lond.)
226:225-226.

Day, M. H. 1967. Femoral fragment of a robust
Australopithecine, from Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania, Nature (Lond.) 221:830-238.

. 1969. Guide to fossil man. Cassell, Lon
 

don.

Social Biology

Davis, P. R. 1964. Hominid fossils from Bed I,
Olduvai Gorge, Tanganyika. A tibia and fibula.
Nature (Lond.) 201:967-968.

Fitcn, F. J., and J. A. Miter. 1970. Radioisotope age determination of Lake Rudolf
artefact site. Nature (Lond.) 226:226-228.

. 1971. Further evidence of Lower Pleistocene hominids from East Rudolf, North Kenya.
Nature (Lond.) 231:241-245.

Leaxy, R. E., F. Munear, and A, C. WALKER.
1971. New Australopithecines from East
Rudolf, Kenya. Amer, J. Phys. Anthrop. 35:
175-186.

Vonpra, C. E., E. D. Jonnson, B. E. Bowen,
and A. K. BEHRENSMEYER. 1971, Preliminary
stratigraphical studies of the East Rudolf
Basin. Nature (Lond.) 226:245~248.

Tosrs, P. V. 1967. Olduvai Gorge 2. The
cranium and maxillary detention Australopithecus (zinjanthropus) boiset. Cambridge Univ.
Press, Cambridge.

 

 
