Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Book notes

To cite this article: (1991) Book notes, Social Biology, 38:1-2, 158-162, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1991.9988782

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1991.9988782

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

%
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lil Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:44
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Book Notes

In SEARCH OF HUMAN NaTUuRE. THE DECLINE AND REVIVAL OF DARWINISM IN
AMERICAN SOCIAL THOUGHT: By Car]
N. Degler. Oxford University Press,
New York. 1991. 400 pages. $24.95,
hardbound.

The idea of a biological root to human nature was almost universally accepted at the turn of the century, then all
but vanished from social thought only to
reappear in the last four decades. Degler traces the early history of this idea,
from Darwin’s argument that human
nature, our moral and emotional life,
evolved from animals just as our human
shape did, to William James’s emphasis
on instinct in human behavior (then
seen as a fundamental insight of psychology). We also see the many applications of biology, from racism, sexism,
and social Darwinism to the rise of intelligence testing, the eugenics movement,
and the practice of involuntary sterilization of criminals.

Degler then examines the work of
those who denied any role for biology,
who thought culture shaped human nature, a group ranging from Franz Boas,
Ruth Benedict, and Margaret Mead, to
John B. Watson and B.F. Skinner.
Equally important, he examines the
forces behind this fundamental shift in a
scientific paradigm, arguing that ideological reasons—especially the struggle
against racism and sexism in America—
led to this change in scientific thinking.

Finally, Degler considers the revival
of Darwinism, led first by ethologists
such as Karl von Frisch, Nikolaas Tin
158

 

 

bergen, Konrad Lorenz, and Jane
Goodall—who revealed clear parallels
between animal and human behavior—
and followed in varying degrees by such
figures as Melvin Konner, Alice Rossi,
Jerome Kagen, and Edward O. Wilson
as well as others in anthropology, political science, and economics.

Carl N. Degler is Margaret Byrne
Professor of American History Emeritus at Stanford University.

THE MANAGEMENT OF NORMALITY. CrITICAL Essays IN HEALTH AND WELFARE: By Abram de Swaan.
Routledge, Chapman & Hall, New
York. 1990. 234 pages. $15.95, paper.

Through a series of case studies, de
Swaan shows how normality is constructed and imposed in society. As he
states in his Introduction, “Maintaining
normality is hard work: a body must be
rested, cleaned, groomed, and clothed
every day; it must be fed properly and
decorously at the correct time and it
must be made to walk the right tracks
and talk the right things. Such normality
presupposes that everyone else behaves
more or less as expected, and that the
entire society pursues its appointed
course”’ (p. 1).

In Part I, the author explores the
power and authority of the medical regime in essays on disease and dependency, affect management in a cancer
ward, and the expansion and limitation
of the medical regime throughout mod
 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 38, No. 1-2

ern society. Part II examines the psychotherapy trade including the client interview and the manner in which life’s
“troubles” become “problems” that are
brought to the proper specialist for
treatment. Part III is devoted to emotions in their social matrix, in essays on
the politics of agoraphobia as women’s
changing behavior at home and in public
changed domestic relations, on jealousy
as a class phenomenon, on intimate relations and domestic relations, and on the
‘survivors’ syndrome”’ as a consequence of former concentration camp
inmates being unable to tell the greater
society in a meaningful way what they
have been through.

These incisive essays strip away the
veil of our automatic acceptance of certain social phenomena as “‘normal” so
that we perceive the process that creates
“normality,” and thus ever thereafter
see its constructs surrounding us. De
Swaan’s fascinating insights evoke Oliver Wendell Holmes’ comment that a
mind once stretched by a new idea can
never return to its original dimensions.

Abram de Swaan is Professor of Sociology at the University of Amsterdam
and Dean of the Graduate School for
Social Science.

THE WELLBORN SCIENCE. EUGENICS IN
GERMANY, FRANCE, BRAZIL, AND
Russia: Edited by Mark B. Adams.
Oxford University Press, New York.
1990. 242 pages. $45, hardbound.

Until recently, almost all published
research on the history of eugenics has
concentrated on the United States or
Britain. Eugenics (from the Greek
eugenés, ““wellborn,”’ developed in the
early part of this century as a science of
human hereditary improvement in more

Book Notes

159

than thirty countries. This volume
presents historical essays on four countries outside the Anglo-Saxon world,
where events unfolded very differently,
and provides a new perspective on the
social dimensions of biology and medicine in continental Europe, Latin America, and the Soviet Union.

Adam’s interest in the history of eugenics began in the 1960’s as an undergraduate at Harvard in Mendelsohn’s
courses on the social context of science.
This volume evolved through the years,
first from a series of seminar papers in
the 1970’s, through a 1983 conference
“The History of Eugenics: Work in
Progress” at the University of Pennsylvania, to discussions at the 1985 International Congress of the History of Science at Berkeley.

Adams, a professor in the Department of History and Sociology of Science, University of Pennsylvania, provides the introductory chapter ‘“Eugenics in the History of Science,” and
the closing chapter “Towards a Comparative History of Eugenics,” in addition to “Eugenics in Russia, 19001940.” Co-contributors are Sheila Faith
Weiss, ‘““The Race Hygiene Movement
in Germany, 1904-1945”; William H.
Schneider, “The Eugenics Movement in
France, 1890-1940”; and Nancy Leys
Stepan, “Eugenics in Brazil, 19171940.” A name and a subject index are
included.

Schneider’s opening remarks in his
essay on France illustrate the enhanced
understanding of eugenics presented by
this multi-cultural approach: ‘Eugenics
movements in non-English-speaking
countries have yet to be studied enough
to produce a significant secondary literature, and one result of this lack of information has been the suspicion, if not
presumption, that eugenics was a peculi
 

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

160 Book Notes

arly Anglo-Saxon affair.... The
French case demonstrates . . . eugenics
. . .«aSa widespread phenomenon found
at the turn of the nineteenth century in
most Western industrial societies. Accordingly, its roots lay in the social class
differentiation and conflict, economic
cycles, and increased growth of government, as well as the scientific view of the
universe, that were some of the most obvious features of the new modern soci
ety” (p. 69).

SICKNESS, RECOVERY, AND DEATH: by
James C. Riley. University of Iowa
Press, Ames. 1989. 295 pages.
$27.50, hardbound.

Like many other organisms, the human species faces a boundary of survival, 2 maximum potential life span
that can be shown on a graph. Yet people in all age groups die of causes as different as heart disease and freak accidents. This historical exploration into
sickness—and, most specifically, its
outcomes—gives us a perspective on the
human life span, past and recent patterns of sickness and recovery, and a
projection of what the future of human
health trends will be.

Using data from records of sick funds
for the previous two centuries, more
conventional public records and case
histories in the past century, and beliefs
and assumptions about sickness that are
common to us all, Riley provides a comprehensive look at ill health in Europe
and North America from the seventeenth century to the present. While
mortality has declined over the past
three hundred years—in the twentieth
century, death has been pushed into the
realm of the old—ill health rates show a
surprisingly independent trend. Before
1870 they fluctuated, depending on ex
 

Social Biology

posure to disease, the age of the population, and other factors. Since about
1870, ill health rates have increased, and
more increase is projected for the future.

This cross-disciplinary integration of
history, medicine and biology will prove
valuable for students of medical history
as well as epidemiologists, gerontologists, demographers, and social historlans.

James C. Riley was awarded the
Ernst Meyer Prize for his work on this
volume. He is Professor of History at Indiana University.

THE POPULATION EXPLOSION: By Paul R.
Ehrlich and Anne H. Ehrlich. Simon
and Schuster, New York. 1990. 320
pages. $18.95, hardbound.

When Paul Ehrlich published The
Population Bomb in 1968, there were
3.5 billion people on earth. Today there
are 5.3 billion, and the population is
growing at the rate of 95 million a year.
If every nation adopted zero population
growth as its goal tomorrow, the worldwide population still would exceed 10
billion people before growth actually
stopped.

The Ehrlichs argue that global warming is aggravated by larger populations,
which use increasing amounts of fossil
fuels and throw greater amounts of
gases into the atmosphere. Perhaps
partly because of climate changes
caused by global warming, worldwide
grain production per person seems to
have peaked and begun to decline, impairing the world’s ability to feed itself.

Intensive farming practices made
necessary by overpopulation have further threatened agricultural productivity, by causing the loss of billions of tons
of topsoil each year and depleting un
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 38, No. 1-2

derground water supplies. Such methods turn productive farmland into
wasteland, create famine, and force
populations to cultivate areas unsuitable

. for agriculture, such as the rain forests

of the Amazon. By destroying the rain
forests, which have been the source of
some of our most important medicines,
we lose forever their genetically diverse
life forms.

In order to sustain our overpopulated
world, say the Ehrlichs, we are spending
in a few generations the life-sustaining
inheritance created over billions of
years. And while civilization might survive without fossil fuels, it can’t survive
without fresh water, soils, reasonably
stable climates, and the working components of Earth’s life support systems—
the diversity of other living organisms.

The Ehrlichs present an activist
agenda for their readers, presenting
them with suggestions for dealing with
overpopulation, first at home, by limiting themselves to one or two children
per family, and by encouraging their
friends and relatives to do so. They describe which organizations to join, how
to educate others, how to influence the
media to address population-related issues, and how to pressure politicians to
support policies that encourage population control. The Ehrlichs also challenge
the Roman Catholic Church’s position
on birth control and the population policies of the Reagan and Bush administrations, which they claim have greatly
hampered efforts to stabilize the world’s
population.

THEORETICAL BIOLOGY. EPIGENETIC AND
EVOLUTIONARY ORDER’ FROM
ComPLeEx SysTEMs: Edited by B.
Goodwin and P. Saunders. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh.
1990. 230 pages, hardbound.

 

Book Notes 161

This volume is a collection of papers
from an international conference held in
Mexico in 1987 to develop the work initiated by C. H. Waddington in his four
volumes of Towards a Theoretical Biology. Together they provide a broadbased yet coherent enquiry into biological processes, which is based on the
search for organizing principles and
rules in different areas of the subject.

Major topics are: self organization in
complex systems; order and adaptability
in genetic networks; and development
and evolution. The link with physics and
mathematics is highlighted in many of
the papers.

Contributors include R. Thom, E. C.
Zeeman, F. Varela, S. Kauffman, B.
Huberman, M. Savageau, P. C. W. Davies, and G. Cocho. Editor B.
Goodwin, Professor of Biology at the
Open University, Milton Keynes, provides a chapter on “Evolution and the
Generative Order.” Editor P. T. Saunders, Professor of Mathematics at
King’s College, London, along with C.
Kubal contributes “‘Bifurcations and
the Epigenetic Landscape.”’ The volume has an author and a subject index.

Wompss AND ALIEN SPIRITS. WOMEN,
MEN, AND THE ZAR CULT IN NorTHERN SUDAN: By Janice Boddy. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison,
1990. 399 pages. $45, hardbound;
$23.95, paper.

Adherents of the zar cult in northern
Sudan encounter spirits that are parallels of historically relevant figures in the
known human world. Those possessed,
usually women, meet aliens who speak
about issues confronting a village such
as the increasing influence of formal Islam or encroaching Western economic
domination.

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

162 Book Notes

The book is organized into three
parts: Part 1 examines the moral universe of village women by discussing the
meaning of female circumcision, personhood, kinship, marriage, and bodily
integrity. Part 2 introduces the zdar cult
and, with several examples, describes
the conditions under which possession,
initially an illness, might occur. Part 3
describes the spirit world apart from
specific incidences of possession in order
to understand what messages villagers
might derive from their experiences of
spirits.

Based on nearly two years of ethnographic fieldwork in a Muslim village in

Social Biology

 

northern Sudan, Janice Boddy’s study
suggests how the spirit world, parallel to
and contiguous with human existence,
acts as a foil for village life in the context
of rapid historical change and provides a
focus for cultural resistance that is particularly, though not exclusively, relevant to women.

Of interest to scholars in cultural anthropology, Wombs and Alien Spirits
makes a contribution to the literature on
women in sexually segregated societies.

Janice Boddy is Assistant Professor
of Anthropology at the University of
Toronto.

 
