Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

Another look at mortality crossovers

Charles B. Nam

To cite this article: Charles B. Nam (1995) Another look at mortality crossovers, Social Biology,
42:1-2, 133-142, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1995.9988893

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1995.9988893

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

ee
(g Submit your article to this journal @
all Article views: 8

»
Q View related articles @

wa Citing articles: 4 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:46

 
Another Look at Mortality Crossovers

Charles B. Nam

Center for the Study of Population
Florida State University
Tallahassee, Florida 32312

 

ABSTRACT: Considerable debate still ensues on whether or not the so-called “mortality crosswover,” the intersection of age curves of mortality at the older ages, is artifactual or real. One
Sschool of thought argues that it is a function of misreporting of ages, greater for one population
_,than another. The other school of thought counters that it persists apart from age misreporting
sand is due to selective frailty processes as age increases. An historical review of the debate is

oO

Decem

Demographers and other scientists
Scontinue to be intrigued by the puzSzling phenomenon of the intersection
“of age curves of mortality at older ages
sfor different populations, or what has
‘scome to be known as “mortality crossovers.” Few accounts of this phenom.2enon refer to the history of its obser“vation and competing explanations. I
shall attempt to provide some details
‘Zabout its evolution and current status
Sas well as propose some generaliza=tions about an integrated explanation.

U

yl

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

The life cycle of mortality risks is
= quite well known to students of popuAlation analysis. Risks of death are highest in the minutes and hours shortly after birth, then become progressively
lower until the early teen ages, and
subsequently increase at older ages to a
high point at the end of life span (Figure 1). The general shape of the resulting age curve of mortality varies very
little among populations. As nations go
through stages of development, mortality risks are lowered at all ages, but
the shape of the curve is essentially re
nloaded b

reported, after which an attempt at a balanced conclusion is offered.

tained. However, the slopes of the
curves in adulthood do vary such that
the curves for different populations can
sometimes be seen to cross each other
(typically at some age of majority).
Such a “mortality crossover” appears
for blacks and whites in the United
States (Figure 2).

Two major hypotheses have been
offered to explain the crossover phenomenon. The first relates to inaccuracies in data reporting, and the second
relates to selectivity in frailty of populations over the life cycle.

Although substantial attention has
been given this phenomenon recently,
it has a fairly long history. Early in this
century, as vital statistics and population censuses became more detailed,
especially at the older ages, observation of mortality crossovers were reported more frequently.

Raymond Pearl, observing the phenomenon in 1922, initially expressed
reservation about its realness but later
found it to be not only comprehensible

’ but consistent with his emerging theory

of the lifetime chances of death (Pearl,
1922, p. 23). An improved level of living, he surmised, ‘down through the

133

 

 
     

Brief Reports Social Biology

     
    
 
    

Model 1
(*8. = 30 yeors},
both sexes

\ S Lo Model It
(**e= 52.5 years)

( °e= 70.2 yeors)
both sexes Zw

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

    
   

Age in years

    

       

  
   
     
   
     
     
       

30

 

0 10 20 30 60 70 80

Fic. 1.~Models of age-specific death rates for each sex corresponding to three different values
of expectation of life at birth (logarithmic scale). Source: United Nations, 1963, Population Bulletin
of the United Nations, No. 6-1962, p. 52, United Nations, New York.

centuries has saved for a time the lives they met, and died in consequence
of ever more and more babies and _ rather promptly. But just because this
young people who formerly could not process tends to preserve the weakwithstand the unfavorable conditions lings, who were speedily eliminated
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] bopeeath Ratenber 2015

Vol. 42, No. 1-2 Brief Reports 135

 

‘A.
0D
w
2.5
° a
LO D
Oo
0
4, ”
a
a CI White
a Black
|
5
45-54 55-64 65-74 75-84 85+

Age

Fic. 2.—Death rates by age and race, for persons 45 and over: United States, 1987 (logarithmic
scale). Source: National Center for Health Statistics, 1990, Vital Statistics of the United States, 1987,
Vol. If, Mortality, Part A, Table 1~4, Public Health Service, Washington, D.C.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

136 Brief Reports

under the rigorous action of unmitigated natural selection, there appear
now in the higher age groups of the
population many weaker individuals
than formerly ever got there.” This is
the first recorded instance of the argument that mortality crossovers can be
real and, when they occur, can be explained by a process of mortality selectivity.

In subsequent decades, not much attention was paid to Pearl’s observation
and explanation. In fact, there were
frequent instances (as indicated below)
when the discovery of a crossover was
dispelled with an assumption of errors
in the data at older ages.

Nevertheless, from time to time,
scholars resorted to Pearl’s perspective
in accounting for crossovers. Sibley
(1930) cautiously attributed blackwhite crossovers in Tennessee to selective effects. Spiegelman (1948) found
a crossover in age-specific mortality
rates of Jews and non-Jews in Canada,
and also alluded to similar findings for
Jews and non-Jews in Berlin and in
New York City. In these cases, Jews
had much Jower mortality rates at
young ages and had higher mortality
rates at older ages than non-Jews. The
crossovers in these cases actually took
place at young adult ages. Spiegelman
attributed this pattern to detrimental
behaviors of Jews, especially dietary
ones.

To dispel the notion that mortality
crossovers occur only when populations being compared are found in
the same geographic location, Myers
(1964) noted the overlapping mortality
curves for the United States and the
Soviet Union. This finding suggested
that the crossover was a function of the
differences in the nature of two mor
 

 

Social Biology

tality curves, but that crossovers could
be observed for pairs of populations
wherever they might appear geographically.

Myers and Bayo (1965) resorted to
U.S. Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance program data to measure
age-specific mortality. Those data used
documentary proof of age and, therefore, countered the argument that misreporting was the explanation. But
their calculations of mortality rates for
blacks and whites in the United States
based on that information still revealed
a mortality crossover.

Spiegelman (1967) elaborated the
Myers and Bayo analysis and concluded that doubt was cast on an explanation of crossover founded on
erroneous data. But Spiegelman suggested that more work was needed to
test the hypothesis of selectivity in
vigor of different populations.

In 1968, Nam surveyed these earlier
accounts and sought to examine the
crossover mystery more extensively.
One approach was to utilize adjusted
population counts by age, sex, and race
for 1950 and 1960 prepared by Siegel
(1967), and to recalculate age-specific
mortality rates for whites and blacks in
the United States (Thornton and Nam,
1968). It was found that, after adjustment, the crossover remained, although the age at crossover moved
slightly upward. The selective process
producing the crossover was advanced
as a combination of biological and social selectivity. A challenge went out to
others to elaborate the explanation.

This challenge was not picked up in
ensuing years. Authors of research that
subsequently reported the crossover
phenomenon tended to fall back on an
explanation of erroneous data. For exDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

Vol. 42, No. 1-2

ample, Kitagawa and Hauser (1973),
who undertook a massive study of socioeconomic differentials in mortality
in the United States, adjusted their
data for age misreporting and census
undercounts and still found a mortality
crossover for whites and nonwhites.
But they were hesitant to reject the
data error hypothesis because, as they
wrote, “their adjustments could not
be complete.” Schoen (1976) reported
““sood reason to believe that nonwhite
death rates at the high ages are substantially understated and actually exceed white rates at least through the
low 80’s.”” Rosenwaike (1979) found
that the crossover persisted after he adjusted the data using the method of extinct generations, and he concluded,
“Investigation is needed that will utilize previously unexploited data to corroborate age statements given on the
death records if we are to attempt to
determine whether the crossing of the
mortality curves for whites and nonwhites at the very old ages is a real phenomenon resulting from some type of
selection in survival patterns . . . or is
an artifact of faulty data.”

Nam and Ockay (1977), and later
Nam et al. (1978) used Cause of Death
Life Tables for National Populations
by Preston et al. (1972) to examine
systematically the existence of crossovers for a large number of paired national populations at different dates,
and to see what relationships there
were between certain causes of death
and the presence of crossover. They
found that (a) crossovers occurred in
about one-third of all possible pairs of
age curves of mortality for countries
represented in Preston et al. (1972),
and (b) differences in the trend of cardiovascular disease at the older ages

Brief Reports

137

was the principal medical cause determinant of whether or not a crossover
took place.

There was a clear necessity to elaborate the selectivity hypothesis by
specifying the mechanisms involved
which was then carried out by Manton
and his colleagues. Articles by Manton
et al. (1979) and Vaupel et al. (1979)
highlighted the heterogeneity of frailty
in populations and timing of the selection mechanisms. The selection model
offered starts from an assumption of
initial distributions of longevity characteristics and postulates that if one population is subjected to a harsher environment and hence a greater force of
mortality in the early and middle ages,
then a smaller and more highly selected proportion of that population is
likely to survive beyond those ages
(Manton and Stallard, 1984). The survivors represent a subgroup of the
starting population who are constitutionally endowed for longer survival,
where constitutional endowment is not
restricted to genetic determinants of
longevity but is taken to include the
prenatal environment as well as a variety of life experiences and exposures
that may influence heterogeneity in
longevity. Weiss (1990) expounded the
theoretical foundation of this formulation, with attention to biological processes.

The intuitive appeal of this model
has not yet convinced proponents of
the data error hypothesis that differential misreporting, especially of age, is

not the reason for mortality crossovers.

Coale and Kisker (1986, 1990) demonstrate the greater level of age misreporting in the census and of underregistration of deaths for blacks than
whites at the older ages. They continue
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

138 Brief Reports

to argue that these errors can account
for mortality crossovers.

Kestenbaum (1992) has challenged
that conclusion. By basing his calculations on age-specific mortality for the
extreme aged population on the Social
Security Administration’s Master Beneficiary Record, with certain types of
questionable records eliminated, he
was able to determine that the race
crossover persists when these more accurate data are used.

Elo and Preston (1993), on the other
hand, used different indirect approaches to measuring the quality of
mortality and population data for
African-Americans in the period 1930—
90. They made data adjustments using
intercensal cohort comparison and extinct generation estimates techniques.
These adjustments revealed substantial reporting errors in the data. Nonetheless, the crossover did not go away.
Subsequently, they used variable -r
procedures to discover the level of
mortality in a North model life table
that was consistent with AfricanAmerican death rates above age 50.
They found that the implied age pattern of mortality was inconsistent with
a crossover pattern. However, their
procedure involves some untested assumptions, and they do not submit
data for the white population to the
same rigorous procedures. In short,
the Elo-Preston effort measures well
the nature of erroneous mortality rates
for blacks but does not go far enough
to dispel the appearance of racial crossovers in mortality.

One other pertinent analysis relates
to China. Coale and Li (1991) have
shown that, with the exception of one
province in China, the effect of age
misreporting In that country is minimal

 

Social Biology

and, consequently, mortality rates for
most of the provinces can be calculated
with a high degree of reliability. We,
therefore, have compared the age
curves of mortality for several provinces of China for which the data are
regarded as exceptionally sound. (it
should be noted that 85 and over was
the oldest age category reported in the
data.) We found that, in a few of the
provincial comparisons, there is an appearance of crossover at the end of the
age curve; in all of the comparisons,
convergence of the curves occurs. Figure 3 displays the comparison for men
of Beijing and Jilin provinces. This
finding suggests that a selective process
is at work even in areas where data are
largely free of reporting errors.

SUMMARY OF WHAT WE KNOW
ABOUT MORTALITY
CROSSOVERS

Studies of the mortality crossover
phenomenon to date lead us to the following generalizations:

1. Crossovers are observed to occur
in a substantial percentage of cases
where age-specific mortality curves of
two populations are compared. However, crossovers do not occur invariably when age-specific curves of mortality are compared (Nam et al., 1978).

2. Crossovers for pairs of populations occur typically when the populations are significantly different with
regard to social and health characteristics associated with varying mortality
risks (Spiegelman, 1948; Thornton and
Nam, 1968).

3. Crossovers are found to exist in
all parts of the world, at different time
periods, and for different types of populations. They are common to both
 

Vol. 42, No. 1-2 Brief Reports 139

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] [264-Death IPegegmber 2015

-1.

[J Beijing
Jilin

-5.
50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74 75-79 80-84

Age

Fic. 3.—Death rates by age, for males 50 and over: Beijing and Jilin Provinces, China, 1981
(logarithmic scale). Source: Population Policy and Vital Statistics in China, 1991 Table 8, I.D.E.
Statistical Data Series No. 56. Institute of Developing Economies, Tokyo, March, 1991. (Courtesy
of Ansley J. Coale)

 

85+

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

140 Brief Reports

sexes and are seen when either agespecific mortality rates or life table
functions are compared. They can also
be observed when either period or cohort data are used (Nam et al., 1968).
In fact, they have been observed in a
study (Munn, 1955) of fruitflies, who
are not notorious for misreporting
their ages, suggesting that mortality
crossovers are not only a human phenomenon.

4. The ages at which mortality
crossovers Occur vary among comparisons and tend to rise to older ages for
comparisons of particular populations
over time (Manton and Stallard, 1984).

5. Mortality crossovers are special
cases of convergence of age-specific
mortality rates. Any attempt to explain crossovers must, therefore, explain convergence as well as crossover.
In fact, where crossovers do not occur,
convergence may still be seen and, in
such cases, similar explanations are required (Nam et al., 1978; Manton and
Stallard, 1984).

6. Because misreporting of age is
common for older persons and for disadvantaged populations, it stands to
reason that at least part of the convergence and crossover process is due to
differential misreporting of age on
death records and in censuses (Coale
and Kisker, 1986). However, convergences and crossovers are still observed when accurate data are used or
biased data are corrected for age misreporting (Kestenbaum, 1992).

7. A corollary explanation for convergences and crossovers is a selective
process in which the more frail among
populations at each age are more likely
to die than the more robust. As a consequence, populations become more
alike in frailty distributions as they age

 

 

Social Biology

and, at some point in the age range, the
selective process may result in the population which had relatively more robust people at younger ages ending
up with relatively more frail people
at older ages (Pearl, 1922; Thornton
and Nam, 1968; Manton and Stallard,
1979).

8. Since the mortality curves that
are being compared are both rising
with age, but one is rising more rapidly
than the other, it is of interest to know
if that difference is associated with particular medical causes of death. It has
been shown that, for a wide array of
comparisons, the general cause category for which variation is significantly
related to the disparity in upward
slopes of the mortality curve is cardiovascular disease (Nam et al., 1978).

9. The mortality convergence and
crossover process is a dynamic one. As
socioeconomic characteristics of two
populations become more alike, as
frailty conditions of those populations
become more alike, and as the quality
of demographic data collected for the
populations become more alike, mortality convergence and crossover will
decline and eventually disappear. To
the extent that those equalities are
not obtained, mortality convergence
will probably continue, and mortality
crossover will probably occur at some
age, however late.

FURTHER STUDY

The saga of the “mortality crossover” is by no means complete. Some
of the “mystery” has been removed,
but much remains to be learned about
the mechanisms that are operating to
alter the age curves of mortality in difVol. 42, No. 1~2

ferent populations in ways that make
them more or less like the others.
Because crossovers are consequences of different age-specific mortality curves that are converging, we
should focus our investigations on the
set of conditions contributing to this
convergence (or the lack of it).
Researchers have devoted considerable effort to specifying the pattern of
= age misreporting that may be involved,
“ without consensus as to its relative importance for convergence or crossover.
Elncreasing attention has also been
® given to heterogeneity of frailty as a
oo force that changes a population’s death
= hazard as it ages, but its relative impact
>on convergence or crossover has not
"_ been determined. We now need to join
~those two variables with two other
S variables—socioeconomic composition
‘and cause-of-death distribution. We
‘Sare reminded that crossovers do not
‘s occur when populations are not markgedly different socioeconomically. So“cial influences may operate through
‘frailty conditions, but some component of such influences also takes
@place in other forms (Markides and
~Mindel, 1987). Cause-of-death pat‘terns are crucial to understanding
“= whether crossovers do or do not occur,

= both because of the finding that cardioA

Brief Reports

141

vascular diseases are critically involved
in the crossover process and because
the earlier morbidity conditions they
reflect may help to specify the frailty
heterogeneity.

Age misreporting and heterogeneity
of frailty are not competing explanations for the observance of crossing
or converging age curves of mortality.
Rather, they seem to be complementary explainers which should be integrated with measures of socioeconomic
composition and cause-of-death distributions into a fuller model for explaining the phenomenon we have come to
know as “mortality crossovers.” More
appropriately, the agenda in this area
should now move to the development
of models embracing all of these factors to enable us to better understand
the differing courses of older agespecific mortality for different populations, with the consequence that we
will then understand convergence and
crossover as a result.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Revision of a paper presented at the annual meeting of the Southern Demographic
Association, New Orleans, LA, 1993. lam
grateful to Carl Schmertmann for helpful
suggestions and statistical advice and to
Chingfa Wu for research assistance.

REFERENCES

Coat, A. J., and E. E. Kisker. 1986. Mortality
crossovers: Reality or bad data? Pop. Stud.
40:389~401.

———. 1990. Defects in data on old-age mortality in the United States: New procedures for
calculating mortality schedules and life tables
at the highest ages. Asian Pacif. Pop. Forum
4(1):1~31.

Coate, A. J., and S, Lr. 1991. The effects of age
misreporting in China on the calculation of
mortality rates at very high ages. Demography 28:293-301.

Exo, I. T., and S. H. Preston. 1993. Quality of
data for estimating African-American mortality, 1930~1990. Ms.

KESTENBAUM, E. 1992. A description of the extreme aged population based on improved
Medicare enrollment data. Demography
29:565-S80.

Kitacawa, E., and P. M. Hauser. 1973. Differential mortality in the United States: A study
in socioeconomic epidemiology. Harvard
Univ. Press, Cambridge.

Manton, K. G., S. S. Poss, and S. Wina. 1979.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

142 Brief Reports

The black-white crossover: Investigation
from the perspective of the components of
aging. Gerontologist 19:291—300.

Manton, K. G., and E. STALLARD. 1984. Recent
trends in mortality analysis. Academic Press,
Orlando.

Markings, K.S., and C. H. MInpEL. 1987. Aging and ethnicity, Sage, Newbury Park.

Munn, M. G. 1955, An inquiry into relative survival of starved and unstarved Drosophila
Melanogaster. Unpublished Master’s thesis,
University of Pittsburgh.

Myers, R. J. 1964. Analysis of mortality in the
Soviet Union according to 1958-59 life tables. Trans. Soc. Actuar. 16:308-317.

Myers, R.J., and F. Bayo. 1965. Mortality of
workers entitled to old-age benefits under
OASDI. Trans. Soc. Actuar. 17:417-431.

Nam, C.B., and K. A. Ocxay. 1977. Factors
contributing to the mortality crossover pattern: Effects of development level, overall
mortality level, and causes of death. Paper
presented at the General Conference of the
International Union for the Scientific Study
of Population, Mexico City.

Nam, C.B., N.L. WeEaTHERBY, and K.A.
Ocxay. 1978. Causes of death which contribute to the mortality crossover effect. Soc.
Biol. 25:306-314.

Social Biology

PEARL, R. 1922. The biology of death. J. B. Lippincott, Philadelphia.

RoOsENWAIKE, I. 1979. A new evaluation of
United States census data on the extreme
aged. Demography 16:279-288.

ScHOoEN, R. 1976. Measuring mortality trends
and differentials. Soc. Biol. 23:235-243.
SIsLEY, E. 1930. Differential mortality in Ten
nessee. Fisk Univ. Press, Nashville.

SreceEL, J. S. 1967. Completeness of coverage of
the nonwhite population in the 1960 census
and current estimates, and some implications. Proceedings of the Conference on Social Statistics and the City, Boston, Massachusetts.

SPIEGELMAN, M. 1948. The longevity of Jews in
Canada, 1940-1942. Pop. Stud. 2:292-304.

. 1967. Why do these mortality curves
cross? New York Statist. 18:6.

THORNTON, R.G., and C.B. Nam. 1968. The
lower mortality rates of nonwhites at the
older ages: An enigma in demographic analysis. Res. Rep. Soc. Sci. 11(1):1-8.

VAUPEL, J. W., K.G. Manton, and E. StratLARD. 1979. The impact of heterogeneity in
individual frailty on the dynamics of mortality. Demography 16:439~454,

Weiss, K. M. 1990. The biodemography of variil in human frailty. Demography 27:185—206.

 
