Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Sociobiology: A valid explanation of child abuse?

Debra Umberson

To cite this article: Debra Umberson (1986) Sociobiology: A valid explanation of child abuse?,
Social Biology, 33:1-2, 131-137, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1986.9988630

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1986.9988630

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:41

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

 

Sociobiology: A Valid Explanation of Child Abuse?

Debra Umberson

Center for Continuing Education of Women
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan

 

ABSTRACT: Most explanations of child abuse among humans focus either on psychologic
dysfunction of the perpetrator of abuse or environmental stress on the perpetrator. More
recently, evolutionary theory and studies of infant abuse among nonhuman species have led toa
sociobiological explanation of child abuse among humans. Advocates of this approach
(Lenington, 1981; Daly and Wilson, 1981) suggest that abuse of offspring be viewed within the
context of genetic relatedness and inclusive fitness. This report addresses the methodological
and theoretical problems which arise when the sociobiological explanation of infant abuse is
applied to humans. Suggestions are made to fill gaps in the sociobiological explanation, consequently allowing rudimentary tests of hypotheses.

Traditionally, sociologists and psychologists have attributed child abuse to
individual pathology or excessive environmental stress. More recently, sociobiologists have explained child abuse
in evolutionary terms, largely based on
the concepts of inclusive fitness and genetic relatedness. If sociobiological tenets are correct, predictive statements
can be developed concerning the proclivity of certain parents to abuse, and
the probability of particular offspring
being abused. This report reviews evidence of infant abuse in nonhuman species and the sociobiological explanation
of child abuse among humans and concludes with suggestions for empirically
testing the sociobiological explanation
of child abuse.

The basis of inclusive fitness is that
animals seek to maximize their evolutionary success by insuring the survival
of their offspring or those offspring most
closely related to them (Dawkins, 1976;
Barash, 1979). Furthermore, the greater the genetic relatedness between adult
and young, the greater the probability
that the adult will protect, nourish, or at

least avoid injuring the young. These
concepts figure heavily in a discussion of
parent-offspring conflict by Trivers
(1974). Trivers argues that parentoffspring conflict arises when parents
perceive their input to the offspring’s
welfare as being more of a cost than
benefit, either in personal energy or in
energy which could be offered to young
who merit more care. The parent must
“determine” that the infant is ready to
survive on its own or that the infant is
not worth further investment.

Trivers’ focus is on conflict between
biological parent and offspring; he
stresses that although conflict is inevitable, the most efficient survival of both
parent and offspring is paramount.
However, there are situations in which a
biological parent or other conspecific
adult physically abuses an infant, sometimes fatally. Abuse of infants and
young by conspecific adults has been
documented for several different species. Analysis of these cases reveals several common components, and supports
principles of genetic relatedness and inclusive fitness.

131

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

132 Umberson

Nonprimate species.—Most documented instances of nonprimate infant
abuse occur under conditions of extreme environmental stress, particularly
crowding. In a 1962 study, excessive
crowding among rats was associated
with exceedingly high rates of infant
mortality which resulted from “‘inadequate maternal care, infanticide and
cannibalism” (Calhoun in Hrdy, 1977,
p. 9). Wilson (1980) notes that guppies
also cannibalize their excess young during periods of overpopulation.

Infanticide under conditions of extreme crowding can be viewed as an example of inclusive fitness. An extremely
crowded environment suggests a limitation of resources. If all are allowed to
survive, the entire species may become
extinct due to starvation. However, by
restricting resources to the members
most likely to survive, the entire group
ultimately benefits by maintaining its
strength and reproducing at a more opportune time. In this sense, destroying
the young enhances the survival of the
species.

Other nonprimates have killed conspecific infants in the absence of environmental stressors. After nomadic lons dispel or kill adult males and take
over a pride, they sometimes kill the
young cubs of the pride. It is suggested
that, since the female can not reproduce
as long as she is nursing her young, ridding the pride of young cubs (sired by
the supplanted males) frees the females
so that they may produce offspring of
the usurping males (Schaller, 1972).
This pattern closely parallels that seen
among mice (Wilson, 1980) and baboons (Hrdy, 1972).

These instances of infanticide may be
viewed as reflecting the influence of genetic relatedness. Because the usurping
lions share no genetic material with the

 

Social Biology

cubs, they have little reason to invest
time and energy in caring for the cubs.
In addition, by killing the cubs sired by
the deposed males, the usurping lions
increase the number of sexually receptive females in the pride, enabling the
usurpers to produce their own offspring.

Nonhuman primates.—More extensive documentation of infanticide exists
for nonhuman primates. Infanticide has
been observed among “hanuman
langurs and numerous other colobines”
as well as in isolated cases among “‘various species of prosimian, the Barbary
macaque, and free-ranging rhesus macaques” (Hrdy, 1977, p. 246). These instances are precipitated by conspecific
males. Hrdy (1977) notes three general
categories of explanation offered for
this behavior: (1) high population
densities—environmental stress; (2)
pathological behavior with no adaptive
value; and (3) sexual selection.

The first two categories are similar to
the environmental stress and psychologic dysfunction explanations seen in the
sociological and psychological literature. The third category, sexual selection, which Hrdy finds most acceptable
based on her studies of infanticide
among the langurs, reflects sociobiological principles. The instances of infanticide observed by Hrdy were evoked by
males not affiliated with the troop who
usurped the leadership of a troop. The
usurping langurs, following much the
same pattern as the lions observed by
Schaller, proceeded to kill the unweaned infants in a troop. Hrdy suggests
that the males killed the infants to avoid
the “‘two to three year delay in female
sexual receptivity should the mother
continue to nurse the infant” (1977, p.
246). By destroying the infant which was
sired by another male, the new male
may then impregnate the female with
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Vol. 33, No. 1-2

his own progeny; hence the explanation,
“sexual selection.”

In sum, while examples of conspecific
abuse of infants and young are limited,
several. patterns do emerge. It seems
that abuse and infanticide are associated
with lack of genetic relatedness between
perpetrator and victim (e.g., lions, primates), low reproductive potential of
victim (e.g., rats, guppies), and excessive environmental stress (e.g., rats,
guppies). These same patterns may be
assessed in an analysis of child abuse
among humans.

Humans.—While the literature on
infant abuse in most species is sparse,
the literature on child abuse among humans is vast. Information has been gathered on rates, perpetrators, victims, and
types of abuse. These rich data sources
make it possible to begin to test hypotheses for the various explanations (e.g.,
psychologic dysfunction, environmental
stress, sociobiological) of child abuse.

Sociobiologists predict that the three
patterns related to abuse of infants
among nonhuman primate and nonprimate species (i.e., lack of genetic relatedness, low reproductive potential, and
environmental stress) are rough predictors of abuse of human offspring by their
primary caretakers. Sarah Lenington
(1981, p. 24) predicts three general conditions which, based on sociobiological
reasoning, should be associated with
child abuse among humans: (1) lack of
confidence in paternity; (2) lack of parental resources; and (3) low reproductive value of offspring.

The first factor, lack of confidence in
paternity, refers to the parent’s belief
that the child shares his/her genetic material (i.e., genetic relatedness). The
second and third factors—lack of parental resources and low reproductive value
of offspring—may be seen as interre
Sociobiology and Child Abuse

 

133

lated. When parental resources are
scarce, parents must provide fewer resources to each child and to themselves
in order for all to survive. In such instances, the parent may deprive a child
so that the parent and other offspring
are more apt to survive on the limited resources (i.e., inclusive fitness).

From a sociobiological perspective, if
resources are scarce and the parents do
deprive a child, that child should not be
chosen at random. Rather, the parents
will find it most “‘beneficial” to deprive
only the offspring which has the lowest
reproductive potential, that is, the child
in which the least time and effort has
been invested, which is farthest from reproductive maturity, and which may be
unable to reproduce as an adult.

These assumptions, based on sociobiological premises, elicit numerous hypotheses, several of which have been examined by Lenington (1981) and Daly
and Wilson (1981). Previous research on
child abuse provides findings which
could be used to support a sociobiological explanation of child abuse. For example, there is empirical support for an
inverse relationship between rates of
child abuse and family income (Gelles,
1981). Daly and Wilson (1981) and
Lenington (1981) suggest that higher
rates of abuse among low income families represent an attempt to conserve resources which would better serve the
parents or other children. There is also
evidence that stepparents are more apt
to abuse their children than are biological parents and that biological fathers
are more apt to abuse their children than
are biological mothers. Several scientists suggest that these relationships are
explained on the basis of genetic relatedness; stepparents have no “genetic investment” in stepchildren (Daly and
Wilson, 1981; Lenington, 1981), and bi 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

134

ological fathers can not be as certain of
parentage (i.e., genetic relatedness) as
can biological mothers (Lenington,
1981). These are only two examples of
the sort of hypotheses which have been
based on the sociobiological explanation of child abuse, but these examples
are very representative of the nature of
such hypotheses.

IDENTIFYING AN ETIOLOGY OF CHILD
ABUSE

While several aspects of child abuse
may be explained by the sociobiological
argument explicated by Daly and
Wilson and Lenington and reviewed
above, they support environmental
stress explanations of child abuse as
well. Thus, it should be noted that,
while there is seeming support for these
hypotheses, there is no actual support
for the sociobiological reasoning behind
the hypotheses. Lenington (1981) acknowledges this problem and suggests
additional hypotheses to provide support for the sociobiological explanation,
while negating the environmental stress
explanation. While Lenington targets
several crucial weaknesses in the evidence for a sociobiological explanation
of child abuse, she too neglects critical
theoretical and methodological considerations.

First, as Lenington points out, most
studies do not clearly separate evidence
for various etiologies of abuse (e.g., environmental stress versus sociobiological). Most of Lenington’s proposed
“corrective” hypotheses also yield to
this error. For example, she hypothesizes that ‘‘a child’s risk of being abused
by his biological father is related to the
father’s confidence in paternity.”” While
this hypothesis is based on sociobiological considerations (i.e., genetic relatedness), it could easily be based on envi
Umberson

 

Social Biology

ronmental stress or psychologic dysfunction considerations. Fathers who
are psychologically impaired and pathologically suspicious of parentage may be
more inclined to inappropriate and violent behavior. Fathers who have realistic reasons to doubt parentage may be
experiencing more marital stress which
may be conducive to domestic violence.

A second problem results from the
nature of the data utilized by these researchers. Most of the empirical support
for the sociobiological explanation reported by Daly and Wilson and by
Lenington is founded on bivariate secondary analyses of single variables with
rates of abuse. However, based on sociobiological tenets, numerous variables
should be considered; for example, age
and sex of perpetrator and victim, relationship between perpetrator and victim, and family income. In sum, a multivariate analysis is mandatory for a
legitimate study on this topic. Bivariate
analyses are not only inadequate, but
misleading.

Third, neither Daly and Wilson nor
Lenington specify what is meant by
“child abuse.”’ Most importantly, sexual
abuse cases should be differentiated
from other forms of physical abuse and
neglect. While a separation of sexual
from other forms of abuse may not be
necessary in environmental stress explanations of child abuse, this separation is
imperative in order to establish a credible sociobiological explanation. If the
basic components underlying child
abuse are related to inclusive fitness,
one would expect stepfathers to sexually
abuse their adolescent stepdaughters
rather than otherwise physically abuse
them, as sexual abuse is an action which
might enhance the stepfather’s evolutionary success.

In sum, there are several problems
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Vol. 33, No. 1-2

with the existing evidence presented in
support of the sociobiological explanation of child abuse. Most analyses are bivariate in nature; the need for relevant
control variables is not addressed; and
sexual abuse cases are not differentiated
from other forms of abuse. The following section incorporates theoretical and
empirical considerations which may
lead to a more adequate test of the sociobiological explanation of child abuse.

A TEST OF THE SOCIOBIOLOGICAL
EXPLANATION

A common finding in research on
child abuse is that one child in a family is
singled out for abuse regardless of the
number of children in the family (Ebbin
et al., 1969; Friedrich, 1976; Gil, 1970).
The focus of abuse on one child lends
credence to the sociobiological explanation of child abuse as opposed to an environmental explanation. Based on sociobiological principles, the least
promising reproductive candidate
should be singled out for abuse in times
of stress or limited resources, whereas
an environmental stress argument implies that all children in a family are at
equal risk of abuse.! Since one child in a
family is typically singled out for abuse,
researchers may examine specific families characterized by abuse and, drawing
from sociobiology, delineate characteristics which should be associated with
the child most susceptible to abuse in
that family. For example, the child’s reproductive potential determined by age
and sex, etc. as compared with that of
his/her siblings, would serve as a partial

1The environmental stress explanation might
predict a focus of abuse on one child in the family if
that child was the primary source of stress in the
family (e.g., when the child is handicapped).

Sociobiology and Child Abuse

135

predictor. Based upon these and several
other characteristics derived from sociobiological premises, a predictive scale
could be created to determine which
child in a family is most susceptible to
abuse. The following outline covers only
the most basic components which
should be included in such a scale and
does not purport to represent a fully adequate basis for such a scale.

I. A sample of families must be
drawn. The families should have more
than one child and must be characterized
by at least one substantiated case of child
abuse. All children in the family should
be of at least average mental and physical
health (as health impairments represent
environmental stress as well as lack of potential for inclusive fitness). Cases of sexual abuse should be examined separately
from other forms of abuse.

II. Scale items should represent three
major components: (1) Genetic relatedness of perpetrator to victim; (2) Status of
family resources; (3) Reproductive potential of child.

Several variables are suggested as representative of these components: for genetic relatedness, (1) perpetrator’s relationship to child as parent (biological,
step, foster, adoptive) or other relative
and (2) sex of perpetrator; for status of
family resources, (1) total family income
and (2) per capita family income; for reproductive potential of child, (1) perpetrator’s age, (2) age of child, (3) sex of
child, and (4) number of siblings.

All of these variables are included in
the American Humane Association’s
national data base. However, data on
abuse or nonabuse of siblings is not included. The AHA format could be used
as a guide in developing items for a predictive scale of child abuse. The most
adequate study on this topic would involve collection of data specific to the
study’s focus. These variables alone, of
course, preclude a comparison of the
predictive power of the sociobiological
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

136

explanation as compared to other explanations of abuse.

Analysis of this or a similar scale
should also include various interactions
between variables (e.g., sex and age of
perpetrator and victim). If the scale
proves to identify the victim of abuse in
a family, further evidence would be provided for a sociobiological explanation
of child abuse. If the scale was found to
have predictive value, it could be used to
identify children at risk of abuse. In addition, sociobiologists would have some
serious evidence for their case on child
abuse. Currently, the sociobiological
explanation has no validity as a basis for
child abuse treatment or policy. As
Lenington (1981, p. 26) notes:

Conclusions about human behavior are
apt to be overtly or covertly translated
into political policy.... At a minimum
we should require that the human data be
consistent with highly specific predictions
made from evolutionary theory. The predictions should differ from those made by
stress or psychiatric models for child
abuse or from those made by an economic model for human behavior.

What may prove to be more interesting and beneficial is a truly integrated
discipline of sociology and biology. To
date, sociobiological hypotheses have
been based exclusively on biological or
evolutionary theory. The sociological
elements are totally lacking. Humans
differ from other animals in many ways.
Child abuse among humans is not simply a natural response based on genetic
relatedness and inclusive fitness. Child
abuse is socially defined and evokes
strong societal response. Sociology and

Umberson

Social Biology

psychology currently provide a substantial theoretical and empirical base for an
understanding of child abuse. This is not
to say that biological concepts do not
also underlie the origins of child abuse.
Humans are complex social creatures
whose behaviors are a response to many
factors. We should consider both sociological and biological factors in attempts
to explain human behavior. Perhaps a
“sociobiology” can begin to address
questions raised by cross-species analyses, such as why humans frequently
damage but do not destroy their children via physical abuse, an action which
further reduces the potential for inclusive fitness. A true socio-biology is an
ambitious undertaking. Oversimplification of its concepts serve only to diminish its potential contributions toward an
understanding of human behavior.

In conclusion, the current sociobiological explanation of child abuse is
based more on rhetorical than methodological manipulation. In order to provide more substantial support for the sociobiological explanation of child abuse,
sociobiologists must conduct more precise and complicated tests of their hypotheses. Until then, the sociobiological
explanation of child abuse is not wellfounded empirically or theoretically.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Special thanks to Michael Hughes and
Polly Phipps for comments, editorial and
otherwise.

This article is based on a paper presented
at the Annual Meeting of the Southern Sociological Society, 1983, Atlanta, Georgia.

REFERENCES

BarasH, Davin. 1979. The whisperings within:
Evolution and the origin of human nature.
Harper and Row, New York.

Day, M., and WiLson. 1981. Abuse and ne
glect of children in an evolutionary perspective. In R. D. Tinkle (ed.), Natural selec
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Vol. 33, No. 1-2

tion and social behavior. Chiron Press, New
York.

Dawkins, R. 1976. The selfish gene. Oxford
University Press, New York.

FRIEDRICH, W. 1976. The role of the child in
abuse: A review of the literature. Amer.
Orthopsychiat. 46(4): 580-90.

GELLES, RICHARD. 1980. Violence in the family:
A review of research in the seventies. J.
Marr. Fam. 42(4) 873-903.

Gir, D. 1970. Violence against children: Physical child abuse in the U.S. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

Sociobiology and Child Abuse

 

137

LENINGTON, S. 1981. Child abuse: The limits of
sociobiology. Ethol. Sociobiol. 2: 17-29.
Hrepy, S. B. 1977. The langers of Abu: Female
and male strategies of reproduction. Har
vard University Press, Cambridge.

Trivers, R. L. 1974. Parent-offspring conflict.
Amer, Zool, 14: 249-264,

SCHALLER, G. B. 1972. The Serengeti lion: A
study of predator-prey relations. University
of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Witson, E. O. 1980. Sociobiology. The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press,
Cambridge.
