Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Becoming voluntarily childless: An exploratory
study in a Scottish city

Elaine Campbell

To cite this article: Elaine Campbell (1983) Becoming voluntarily childless: An exploratory study
in a Scottish city, Social Biology, 30:3, 307-317, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1983.9988544

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1983.9988544

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Fone | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
ail Article views: 8
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 3 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

 
 

Becoming Voluntarily Childless:
An Exploratory Study in a Scottish City

 

Elaine Campbell

Department of Social Studies,
The Queen’s University of Belfast,
Belfast, Northern Ireland

Va
SABSTRACT: This paper looks at motives that inform the decision to remain voluntarily childless.
It is assumed that voluntary childlessness is not a pathological condition nor is it determined by
pecific social situations. Situations provide the context within which motives emerge, in the
Erase of voluntary childlessness providing individuals or couples with the opportunity to concsider unconventional interpretations of family life that may eventually lead to its rejection. Indiiduals who become childless prior to finding a “partner” tend to come from families which
Cdeviated from the nuclear ideal and to reject parenthood. Those whose decision emerges after a
partnership” has been formed tend to have created alternative life styles and wish to protect
crthe advantages of living without children. It is tentatively concluded that the proportion of

 

—rouples remaining childless will increase.

—_

S Marriage remains the legitimate con-stext for parenthood. Those who marry
=not only have the right to become parents but are expected to do so (Busfield,
51974; Busfield and Paddon, 1977;
‘ZVeevers, 1972). The majority of ScotStish couples conform to these expectaStions. In 1971 fewer than 2 per cent, or
plust under 15,000 out of a million
women, married once only and at ages
Sunder 45, were childless by choice. The
revious twenty years had in fact witEnessed a decline in childlessness among
Awomen marrying during the prime reproductive years, the early to midtwenties. In 1951, of women aged 45 to
49, who had married at 20 to 24, and at
25 to 29, possibly 2 per cent and 6 per
cent respectively were voluntarily childless. By 1961 the proportions were down
to 1 per cent and 3 per cent. In 197] the
situation was unchanged. More recent
indications are of an increase, how dramatic, however, remains to be seen
(OECD, 1979).
Failure to conform to these expecta
307

tions is excused if due to sterility or serious genetic impediment; no similar excuse or justification exists for those who
choose to remain childless (Mead, 1949;
Firestone, 1972; Veevers, 1980). Their
behavior is interpreted as selfish, neurotic, unnatural, immature, and either
censured as abrogation of social responsibility or pitied as proof of some personal, yet unavoidable, character defect
(Polit, 1978; Blake, 1979).

Until recently, these views found
some support in the work of social scientists who stressed the normality and
value of conventional family life
(Veevers, 1973; Skolnick, 1973) and
who looked for explanations of deviant
behavior in personal pathology, faulty
socialization, or adverse social conditions. The applicability of these assumptions to the study of the voluntarily
childless appears not to have been
tested, but in other areas of social life
proved disappointing. There appeared
to be no obvious psychological or physiological differences between the deviant
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

308

and nondeviant nor did a defective social environment always lead to nonconformity.

Disappointment led to dissatisfaction
and to the emergence of perspectives
that reject the determinism of these
early approaches, and that assume all individuals ‘‘are capable of wishing to do
anything and doing anything they wish”
(Box, 1981, p. 132). The question then
becomes one of explaining how an individual comes to want to deviate, and
wanting to deviate how he comes to do
so. Relating these questions to the voluntarily childless, this study attempts to
identify situations that, by providing individuals with the opportunity to interpret parental and childless roles in other
than conventional ways, provide them
with the motivation that under favorable circumstances will result in voluntarily childless marriage.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Data were collected during 1974-75
from 78 individuals who were partners
in voluntarily childless marriages,
defined as marriages where both partners shared the intention to remain
childless. Respondents were volunteers
contacted at family planning clinics in
and around a Scottish city. Since the aim
of the study was to obtain a detailed biographical account of the situations and
motives informing the decision to remain childless, interviews were unstructured and recorded on tape. The success
of this approach depends upon the cooperation of “participants in the sphere
of life . . . who are acute observers and
well informed” (Blumer, 1969, p. 41).
Although the scarcity of contacts made
it impossible to preselect respondents
according to these criteria, the 34 couples and 10 wives eventually interviewed

Campbell

 

Social Biology

proved willing and able to recount their
life histories and to put into words, if not
always articulately and systematically,
their decision to remain childless. Their
characteristics are summarized in Table 1.

RESULTS

The decision to remain childless
stems from one of two basic positions.
Individuals are motivated either to
avoid the penalties of parenthood or to
protect the rewards of childlessness
(Veevers, 1980) (see Table 2). The two
positions are not mutually exclusive. Individuals, as their circumstances change
and external pressures for them to conform grow, may supplement, modify,
and reject as redundant their initial motivation (Veevers, 1980). They nevertheless remain aware of the distinction
between motives that informed and
those that emerged out of their commitment to childlessness.

AVOIDANCE OF PARENTHOOD:
SITUATIONS, INTERPRETATIONS, AND
MOTIVES

Individuals whose decision to remain
childless begins with avoidance of parenthood are able to trace their commitment back to childhood or adolescence.
Having observed or participated in family life, they decide neither to emulate
nor to reenact what they they have seen
or experienced. Twenty-seven of the 30
avoiders had never expected to become
parents; the noncommittal views of 3
others had changed to avoidance on the
prospect of marriage. Primary motives
informing the wish to avoid parenthood
are presented in Table 3.

PARENTHOOD AS DAUNTING PROSPECT

Fifty per cent of all childless women
and 30 per cent of childless men dis 

Vol. 30, No. 3 Becoming Voluntarily Childless 309

TABLE 1
SELECTED CHARACTERISTICS OF THE RESPONDENTS

 

Characteristics Nodd) ‘ea
MICK 0G. crea ccnmns 28 Oe 88 08 Oe REDSS OE OK EE Ree ee ek 29 31
Mean age at Marriage... 0... cee eee eee eee eee ee ee aee 24 25
Mean no. of years married... 0... ccc ccc ee tee eet en se eneees 5 6
Socioeconomic status
(Professional Occupations, ct¢.} vs ccses ox cxwes va nawes cowed va vawaes 7 10
II (Intermediate occupations) ........ eee eee ee cece eee eee eens 19 14
III Non-manual (Skilled occupations) ......... 00. ce ese ee eee e ee eeee 13 3
wn TH Manual (Skilled occupations) ......... 0.0. c cece e eee cece eeeeee 1 4
— Member of the Armed Forces. ....... 06.0 e cece cece ence cece en eeers 0 1
Cl Pulbtime student oc cc sg oo pays pga ge oe os wanes oa ea ee RE TERRES Be OE 1 Z
9 Housewife.......... bec ence eee eee eeseeteseeeecteenes 3 0
ELevel of schooling attained
© Left as soon as old ENOUGH. 0... cece cee tee e ete eee v nena 10 6
A Stayed On but no qualifications . 2 so44s 0c cease cenaaae pa bg iea ya vans 3 0
oo Stayed on till 16/18 with some
S qualifications. 0... cece eee eee eee nent een enees . 16 11
& College of Education/Art College. ...... 0... e ccc c cece reece eens 3 5
cn University/Polytechnic. ..... 0... cece ccc cece eee eee een ee erate 1] 10
~ Mature student...... 0.0.0 cece cece eee e ee cece tenet ce teeeeeenets 1 2
‘g
o
2p
a
cs
=
6
> TABLE 2
Z BASES OF INDIVIDUAL MOTIVATION
§
5 Women Men
P Bases (N=44) — (N=34)
Po
Avoidance of parenthood ............ cece cece cee cence te eenes 17 13
-&Protection of Childlessness........ 2... cece cece eee cece een eeeeeees Za 21
g
q
5
©
a
TABLE 3

PRIMARY MOTIVES INFORMING THE WISH TO AVOID PARENTHOOD

 

 

 

Motives Wey (Wet)
Parenthood as daunting prospect ......... 0.0 c eee eset e eee teen eee 2 0
Parenthood as loss of control over self and future.................0000- 8 7
Parenthood as financial deprivation ......... 2.0.0... cece cue e ee eeues 1 1
Parenthood as too heavy a responsibility .... 2.0.0.2... cece cece eee ee 2 3
Childten 86 Gbjects GE USKG sae can nu ee cases os om ems we pa REF L 4 Oa HE 4 2

 

 
 

 

 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

310

paraged the daily tasks of parenthood,
describing them as monotonous,
grubby, and unrewarding; 27 per cent of
the women and 10 per cent of the men
also belittled the mechanics of pregnancy and childbirth, stressing the discomfort, disruption, ugliness, pain, and
lack of dignity involved. These interpretations provide material for the case
against parenthood but are generally
perceived as insufficient reason for its
rejection.

Only two women recognized the
daunting prospect of parenthood as having provided the initial motivation for
their commitment to childlessness. Both
could trace their unconventional views
back to early childhood and to strained
relations with mothers who denigrated
and advised against the maternal role.

PARENTHOOD AS Loss OF CONTROL OVER
SELF AND FUTURE

Loss of control over self and future
was the most frequently cited motive for
avoidance of parenthood. Recognizing
a parent’s prime responsibility to be to
his family and not to himself, 8 women
and 7 men had decided during adolescence to avoid this selfless image.

Ten of the 15 may have been
prompted to this interpretation by their
experiences of family life. Of the 6
women, 4 had witnessed marital breakdown, 1 had been illegitimate and
placed in children’s homes, 1 had a
handicapped sibling, and all described
their mothers as having been “‘martyrs”
to motherhood (Veevers, 1979). Of the
4 men, 2 had elderly parents, 2 had
mothers engrossed in careers, and all
were only children.

Possibly of greater significance, anda
feature common to all 15 as adolescents,
was the lack of importance they attached to the conventional values, opin
 

Campbell

Social Biology

ions, and sentiments expressed by those
with whom they had close contact, particularly parents. Relations were described as affectionate, yet remote, a
factor that has been linked by sociologists to certain forms of adolescent deviance (Box, 1981).

Loss of control, once recognized as a
feature of the parental role, becomes a
significant argument for its rejection.
Thirty per cent of all childless women
saw motherhood as a threat to their
identity. Mothers were described as
“‘cabbages”’ buried beneath the trivia of
childbearing and childrearing. Although acting as justification for a decision taken on alternative grounds, this
description of the selfless, almost invisible woman is nevertheless a powerful
image reinforcing commitment to childlessness.

PARENTHOOD AS FINANCIAL
DEPRIVATION

One of the most obvious costs of parenthood but one given little emphasis by
the childless, is the financial (Baum and
Cope, 1980). Having more money to
spend than their peers was described by
45 per cent of childless women and 50
per cent of childless men as an advantage but not their reason for wishing to
avoid parenthood.

One man and one woman, however,
had decided in adolescence to try to
avoid the material hardships experienced during childhood. The man, an
only child, believed his parents to have
been financially deprived when compared with childless relatives and had
equated their relative deprivation with
parental responsibilities. The woman
had faced a severely disturbed childhood—marital breakdown, divorce,
mother’s illness and death, father’s
blindness and subsequent remarriage
Vol. 30, No. 3

and death, children’s homes—and had
decided to avoid the financial insecurity
and deprivation she attributed to family
life.

PARENTHOOD AS TOO HEAVY A
RESPONSIBILITY

Although 27 per cent of childless
women and 28 per cent of childless men
considered childbearing a difficult task

‘9 in present-day conditions—problems of
= discipline, education, and drug-taking
By being frequently mentioned—only 2
& women and 3 men had based their com3 mitment to childlessness upon a wish to
55 avoid the heavy responsibilities in© volved in raising “‘decent citizens.”
Central to this interpretation were
their observations and evaluations of
the effects of parenting upon themselves; a positive evaluation of their par‘= ents’ performance had lead one woman
= and man to avoid parenthood on the basz sis of their inability to live up to such
> Standards. In contrast, one woman and
two men described their parents as having let them down and themselves as
> having emerged from childhood neither
> as secure nor as stable as they might oth
D

gan] at 13:39

cnl

niversi

Becoming Voluntarily Childless 311

they had decided to avoid the responsibility.

CHILDREN AS OBJECTS OF DISLIKE

Thirty-two per cent of childless
women and 40 per cent of childless men
appeared intolerant of children and
childish activities. For 3 women and 2
men, however, negative feelings toward
children formed their reason for wishing
to avoid parenthood. The men were
only children whose fathers had been
absent for long periods during childhood and who now felt particularly ill at
ease with male infants. The women, on
the other hand, rejected children of
both sexes; all 3 had experienced family
life characterized by marital breakdown
and mothers ambivalent towards the
maternal role.

The wish to avoid parenthood is
based upon negative evaluation of the
parental role. Direct involvement in unconventional family situations—
deviations from the ideal model of parents and children living together in
comparative harmony, with husband
and wife adhering more or less to traditional gender roles—appears to have
provided 22 of the 30 avoiders with the

"9 erwise have been. Fearing a similar ef- opportunity to consider an alternative to

3 fect upon any children they might have, conventional family life (Table 4).

O

g

& TABLE 4

UNCONVENTIONAL FAMILY SITUATIONS OF AVOIDERS
Situations qvanisy" ( oe 9) .

Sf BG oe memes nu na seam 4a An SO we oe HOR aewae Neo KM OE 3 6
Marital breakdown. ........ 0... c cece ce cee cect ee cen eteseeeeeeye 7 3
Handicapped sibling. ......... 0. cece eee cere reer ete neeeeeees 2 2
Anti-natalist mother. .................06- See reset beeps on Meuee ied ue 2 0
Career-oriented mother... 0.0.0... cc ce cc ec ccc ete nc eeenceeteseees 0 z
Taken into Care... cc ce cc twee cece e tee evetencecueee 2 0
Absent same-sex parent..... 0... cece c eect e eee ener eee een eeeneeee Zz 3

“Exceeded by number of situations since the categortes were not mutually exclusive
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

312

Obviously not all individuals experiencing unconventional family situations
translate this experience into the desire
to avoid parenthood. A factor that may
facilitate this process is the distance, social and geographical, that individuals
place between themselves and their
families of origin (Box, 1981). Levels of
mobility experienced by avoiders prior
to the development of a childless relationship are summarized in Table 5.

Social and geographical mobility may
weaken the significance of the opinions,
values, and sentiments of conventional
others, i.e., parents, to whom the individual may be emotionally attached.
Sixty-five per cent of the women and 70
per cent of the men who had wished to
avoid parenthood described their relations with parents during childhood and
adolescence as affectionate, yet remote,
situations subsequently exacerbated by
social and geographical mobility.

While unmarried, an individual’s
commitment to avoiding parenthood
may go unchallenged; its significance is
to the context of marriage. Recognizing
the close relationship between marriage
and parenthood, 12 of the 17 female
avoiders but only one of the males had
questioned the possibility of marriage,

Campbell

 

Social Biology

believing they would not meet a partner
who would share their perspective.
They were in fact acting upon the assumption that parenthood is in some
way natural and conforming to perceptions of themselves as unnatural and abnormal. The 5 women and 12 men who
had seen no obstacle in the way of marriage had recognized childlessness as a
legitimate alternative and themselves as
rational decision-makers.

For a couple to be voluntarily childless, they must share the intention to remain childless. Thirteen women and 12
men had found like-minded partners.
Three women and 2 men had rejected
an earlier prospective partner on the
grounds of incompatible reproductive
goals. Four women and 1 man had been
able to persuade partners, conventionally committed, to accept the idea of
marriage without children.

PROTECTION OF CHILDLESSNESS:
SITUATIONS, INTERPRETATIONS, AND
MOTIVES

The motives creating commitment to
protecting childlessness emerge out of
stable, long-standing relationships. Individuals, previously committed to parenthood, decide to forego this option in

TABLE 5

LEVELS OF SOCIAL AND GEOGRAPHIC MOBILITY EXPERIENCED BY AVOIDERS PRIOR TO THE
DEVELOPMENT OF A CHILDLESS RELATIONSHIP

Mobility

Social mobility

Upwardly mobile ....... 0.00.00. cece eee eens
Downwardly mobile. ......... 2. ce eee eee eens
Immobile. ........ 60. e ee eee ee cece eee e eee

Mobile... ..... ccc cece ccc ec ee eee e eee eces

Women Men

(N=17) (N= 13)
ee 14 10
on GgOGn ge cowpea pens 0 0
Lee cee eeeteceeeetes 3 3
tne e cece raceeceses 10 10
684 nS bE ES od aE ee to 7 3
cece cee ce en ecaceees 8 8

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 30, No. 3

order to maintain, foster, and protect
the advantages of living together without children. The primary motives of the
26 women and 17 men who had made
this decision are presented in Table 6.

CHILDLESSNESS AS MARITAL HARMONY

Sixty per cent of all childless women
and 68 per cent of childless men believed
a child would detract from their marital
relationship. Although in the majority
of cases this interpretation had emerged
out of the decision to remain childless, 7
women and 4 men had based their commitment on the belief that childlessness
would protect marital harmony. Of
these, 3 women and 3 men were participants in relationships centered around
sexual harmony. They assumed parenthood would threaten this bond by lowering the female’s level of involvement
and reducing her sexual appeal. All 6
were skeptical of conventional family
life, 5 of the 6 linking their views to
childhood experiences which included
Jong periods of separation from parents,
the absence of a same-sex parent, and
the career-oriented mother. These experiences are likely to have engendered
a less positive commitment to parenthood, and one the reality of married life
could readily question.

The possible conflict of interest between marital and parental roles was

Becoming Voluntarily Childless

313

also the motive informing the decision
of 2 women and one man in whose marriages one partner experienced a deep
emotional dependence. A child would
mean sharing the emotional resources of
the dominant partner who was invariably male and who accepted the female’s right to the final say on the question of parenthood.

A further scarce resource shared by
couples is leisure time. One of the
widely recognized advantages of childlessness is a couple’s ability to spend
time doing things together. Jt was the
motive however of only 2 women whose
main experience of companionship was
the social outing. Both women had been
introduced to the idea of childlessness
by their husbands and had accepted
commitment on the grounds that their
compliance was one way of avoiding the
strain increased segregation might place
on their marriage.

CHILDLESSNESS AS A CONDITION FOR
MARRIAGE

One woman and 2 men had agreed to
remain childless as a condition for marriage; the marriages would otherwise
not have been contracted. Although all
3 had experienced doubts as to whether
they should renounce commitment to
parenthood, having done so, they had
reinforced their decision by drawing up

TABLE 6
MoriveEs INFORMING COMMITMENT TO THE PROTECTION OF CHILDLESSNESS

Motives

Childlessness as:

Marital harmony. ............ 0.02 c eee ee eee

Condition for marriage

Routine ..... 0... ec cc ec cee ee eee eee

ee

Women Men

(N= 27) (N=21)
ect ee ee eeeesaveeees 7 4
Subd oe weFd om Fees 1 Zz
eTrer rir errr 11 7
cee cece tec eeeteees 7 7
bec e eee e eee ences 1 1
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

314

a case for childlessness independent of
their partners’ and which encompassed
motives both of avoidance and protection.

CHILDLESSNESS AS ROUTINE

Couples who delay conception may
find that childlessness becomes an implicit assumption informing their daily
routine. They plan, spend, socialize,
work, and relax from an increasingly
childless perspective (Veevers, 1980).
Wanting to protect the routine they had
created was in fact the motive behind
the decision to remain childless taken by
the 11 women and 7 men who had experienced delay. Of these, 4 women and 1
man had tried to become parents and
had failed, but had not sought medical
advice. The other 7 women and 6 men
had never been in or had got out of step,
through late marriage or other adverse
circumstances such as financial difficulty
or family illness, with the reproductive
timetable represented by the actions of
their peers. At the time they had acknowledged their commitment, all 18
were over the age of 30 and had considered themselves, particularly the
women, “‘too old” for parenthood
(Rindfuss and Bumpass, 1976).

They lead comfortable but ordinary
lives with male and female adhering to
traditional gender-roles. Born before or
during World War II (the average age of
the men being 38, of the women 35),
they appear to have been part of a generation for whom the gender roles had
been clearly defined. The women work
at jobs, not careers, and are primarily
responsible for the home; the men are
breadwinners with limited domestic responsibilities.

Postponement will increase the likelihood of childlessness by allowing couples the opportunity to compare their sit
Campbell

Social Biology

uation with that of conforming peers
while at the same time developing a
childless existence for themselves. At
feast some observations will favor childlessness, and delayers frequently cite
the significance of the comparative
peace and tranquility of their situation
for their decision to remain childless.
They are also able to partially excuse
their nonconformity in terms of earlier
attempts to conceive or the inappropriateness of their age.

CHILDLESSNESS AS FULFILLMENT

Also protective of their way of life
were 7 women and 7 men whose commitment had been made during the
early years of marriage, in their early to
mid-twenties. They had expected to become parents but when faced with realizing their expectations had opted for
the greater fulfillment they hoped to
achieve by remaining childless and pursuing alternative goals (Table 7). Being
able to achieve these goals more readily
was recognized as an advantage
amongst the childless as a whole and was
frequently cited as integral to the case
against parenthood (Table 8).

The 14 men and women whose decision to remain childless was based upon
the interpretation of childlessness as
fulfillment had rejected conventional
beliefs that stress the importance of children for a meaningful and satisfying existence. They did so on the basis of rational discussion, seeing their decision
as a logical and legitimate extension of
planned parenthood. Following this cultural directive, they had avoided unplanned pregnancy and had simply extended this to indefinite postponement.
They recognized the deviant nature of
their commitment but believed themselves to be at the forefront of a movement toward freedom of reproductive

 
8 December 2015

S
a
oo

t 13

Vol. 30, No. 3 Becoming Voluntarily Childless 315
TABLE 7
GOALS INFORMING THE NOTION OF CHILDLESSNESS AS FULFILLMENT
Women Men
Goals (N= 7) (N=7)
Woman’s Carer... ce ccc cece cece ee te neeeceteeseeeeturerce 3 2
Staridard Of Living 26 oy oss csgs go oe we asg os pe be Aes hed od beds a BEER BE 1 1
Spontameaus actiON . 0... ccc cece cece eee e ee eeeenenees 3 4
TABLE 8
GOALS RECOGNIZED AS BEING MADE More ACCESSIBLE BY CHILDLESSNESS
Women Men
Goals (N=44) (N=34)
Woman’s Career... 2. ccc ccc ce cece cee tee e eu ecrcuctueerecees 27 10
Standard of living ...... 0... cece eee et cece eee e cee seteneesenees 45 50
SPONPANCOUS ACHOMN, 6... iid gi 5 gs Heed Ke Ho ew Rees On ned ne bee ks Oe OG 75 82

3
‘echoice. Of the 14, 12 were upwardly moSobile, 10 were university-educated, and

3

©
—
os
N
Samed
oO
>
os
c

wnloaded by [U

°
A

all were members, or prospective members, of the professional middle-class.
As in the case of many avoiders, they
had moved away from the expectations
and values of their parental background
and appeared totally at ease with their

—nonconformity.

CHILDLESSNESS AS MORAL AND SOCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY

Just over 30 per cent of respondents
expressed anxiety over the “state of the
country and of the world” and, more
specifically, over the ‘population problem” and saw this as a feature of their
case for remaining childless. They admitted, however, that if other more personal motives had been absent, such altruistic notions would not have
prevented them from having children.
Only one woman and one man recognized their decision to remain childless
aS a moral and social responsibility.
Both were in their early twenties,

university-educated, and emotionally
detached from their families of origin.

Becoming childless in order to protect the rewards of living together without children, involves couples in the reversal of a prior commitment to
parenthood. Obviously the agreement
of both spouses is required if the marriage is to be voluntarily childless.
Twenty-four of the 26 couples saw their
commitment as mutual and their decision as having emerged out of their relationships with neither partner as instigator.

Certain situations appear to favor
this outcome. Forty per cent of “protectors” had experienced postponement,
delay, or problems with pregnancy.
They were drawn from varying social
backgrounds and saw their childlessness
as more accident than rational decision.
This was not the case with the remaining
60 per cent, all of whom described their
commitment to be the result of rational
consideration. The factors allowing this
group the opportunity to escape conven 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

316

tion are similar to those of “‘avoiders”—
an unconventional family background
and/or upward social mobility linked to
a high level of education. These findings
suggest that the childless will not necessarily be drawn from the higher status
sections of society (Baum and Cope,
1980), but that these groups will be disproportionately represented (Veevers,
1980).

CONCLUSIONS

Obviously no firm conclusions as to
the situations and motives informing the
decision to remain childless can be
drawn from this small-scale exploratory
study (Veevers, 1980). Evidence however suggests that voluntary childlessness is not a reflection of neurosis or immaturity, nor do the childless appear as
selfish or as irresponsible as the stereotype implies.

Although explaining reproductive
behavior has proved notoriously difficult (Movius, 1976; Houseknecht,
1978; Veevers, 1979), the childless,
partly in response to their deviant status
(Mills, 1940), appear to have little difficulty articulating their motives. Interpreting the relevance of such motives,
however, remains problematic. Reproductive motivation is not only complex,
but is also variable and likely to change
with the individual and his circumstances (Allport, 1955). In other words,
motives that inform initial commitment
to childlessness may be superceded by
others more relevant to a later stage in
the life-cycle (Veevers, 1980).

Findings from this study indicate that
two of the more accessible motives, a
desire for freedom and, on the part of
women, the opportunity to pursue careers (Baum and Cope, 1980; Veevers,
1980), are more likely to emerge out of

 

Campbell

Social Biology

than to inform the early stages of the
childless career. These and other motives may also take the form of post hoc
justifications (Kiesler, 1977) or be used
as “relevant facts” to supplement accounts. A dislike for children, the
daunting prospect of parenthood and its
responsibilities, and the financial advantages of childlessness were ‘“‘motives”
frequently used in this way. Respondents tended not to differentiate the motivational status of the many strands to
their accounts and to have difficulty recalling the relevance and timing of specific “motives,” but the probing and demand for detail required by a
biographical approach overcame some,
if not all, of these difficulties.

Such an approach is also appropriate
when attempting to identify situations
favoring the emergence of a childless
motivation (Blumer, 1969). Tentative
identification has already been made—
being an only child, having parents
“martyrs” to parenthood and being out
of step with the reproductive timetable
have received particular attention
(Veevers, 1980). This study supports
these findings, but suggests that the situations identified only provide individuals with the opportunity for considering
the childless alternative and are neither
necessary nor sufficient conditions.
Whether they take the opportunity—
and having taken it, decide to remain
childless—will depend upon how they
weigh their various interests. Wanting
to avoid parenthood or to protect childlessness must be seen to provide benefits
outweighing the costs of nonconformity.
Included in the latter will be the disapproval of conventional others. The
childless tend, in fact, to have distanced
themselves emotionally from those, particularly parents, who might be expected to express conventional opinions
Vol. 30, No. 3

in relation to family life and to have created a childless relationship which acts
as a cushion against criticism.

It might be tentatively concluded that
the proportion of childless couples 1s
likely to increase. On the one hand, the
depressed nature of the economy and of
social life in general may be expected to
lead to postponement of pregnancy and
to a subsequent desire on the part of
some couples to protect the rewards of

=childlessness. On the other hand, the
“growth in one-parent families and of
families in which women work or pursue

gan| at 13:39 08 Decem

LLPORT, G. W. 1955. Becoming. Yale Univ.
Press, Princeton.

AUM, E, and D. R. Cope 1980. Some characteristics of intentionally childless wives in
Britain. J. Biosoc. Sci. 12:287-299.

LAKE, J. 1979, Is zero preferred? American attitudes toward childlessness in the 1970's. J,
Marr. and Fam. 41:245~257.

‘"SBLUMER, H. 1969. Symbolic interactionism.

~. Prentice-Hall, New Jersey.

>Box, S. 1981. Deviance, reality and society.

versity of Michi

5 2nd ed. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Lon© don

"SBUSFIELD, J. 1974. Ideologies and reproduc< tion. In M.P.M. Richards (ed). The inte3 gration of the child into a social world. CamA bridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.

BUSFIELD, J., and M. PAppon 1977. Thinking
about children. Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge.

FIRESTONE, S. 1972. The dialectic of sex. Paladin, St. Albans.

HOUuSEKNECHT, S. K. 1978. Voluntary childlessness: A social psychological model. Altern.
Lifestyles 1:379-402.

KIESLER, S. B. 1977. Post hoc justifications of
family size. Sociometry, 40:59-67.

Meap, M. 1949. Male and female. William

Morrow, New York.

Becoming Voluntarily Childless

317

careers provide at least one set of conditions for avoidance of parenthood. It is
also possible that the idea of childlessness as a legitimate objective may become more widely accepted as behavior, expectations, and values in the area
of family life come under increasing
scrutiny.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I would like to thank Drs. Nancy Loudon
and Margaret Oliver without whose initial
help in gaining access to respondents this
study would not have been possible.

REFERENCES

_Mityis, C. Wricut 1940. Situated actions and

vocabularies of motive. Am. Soc. Rev.
5:904-913.

Movtus, M. 1976. Voluntary childlessness: The
ultimate liberation. Fam. Coord. 25:57-63.

OECD. 1979. Child and family. Demographic
developments in the OECD countries.
Paris,

Pouit, D. F. 1978. Stereotypes relating to
family-size status. J. Marr. Fam. 40:105-14.

Rinpruss, R.R., and L.R. Bumpass. 1976.
How old is too old? Age and the sociology
of fertility. Fam. Plan. Pers. 8:226~230.

Sxoinick, A. 1973. The intimate environment.
Little Brown, Boston.

VEEVERS, J. E. 1972. The violation of fertility
mores: Voluntary childlessness as deviant
behaviour. /n C. Boydell, C. Grindstaff and
P. Whitehead (eds.), Deviant behaviour
and societal reaction. Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, Toronto.

. 1973. Voluntary childlessness: A ne
glected area of family study. Fam. Coord.

22:189-205.

. 1979, Voluntary childlessness: A re
view of issues and evidence. Marr. Fam.

Rev.

. 1980, Childless by choice. But
terworths, Toronto.

 

 

 
