Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Book notes

To cite this article: (1996) Book notes, Social Biology, 43:1-2, 136-139, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1996.9988918

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1996.9988918

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

%
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lil Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:47
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Book Notes

SEXUAL ATTRACTION AND CHILDHOOD
ASSOCIATION: A CHINESE BRIEF FOR
EDWARD WESTERMARCK: By Arthur
P. Wolf. Stanford University Press,
Stanford, CA, 1995. 561 pages.
Hard cover.

Based on more than two decades of
research, including an intensive investigation of the marital histories of
14,200 Chinese women, this book accomplishes several purposes. It poses a
serious challenge to Freudian psychology; it demonstrates the existence of a
critical period in human sexual development; and it shows that most explanations of the human incest taboo are
based on a false premise. Its conclusions have great relevance to research
in behavioral biology (particularly primatology), psychology, and sociology,
as well as anthropology.

In 1891, the anthropologist Edward
Westermarck proposed that early
childhood association inhibits sexual
attraction and that this aversion was
manifested in custom and law as the
basis of the universal incest taboo. His
argument was accepted as “‘the solution of the problem”’ by such eminent
scholars as Edward Burnett Tylor and
Alfred Russel Wallace. Then, in 1910,
in the essays later published as Totem
and Taboo, Sigmund Freud challenged
the ““Westermarck hypothesis” on the
ground that “‘the earliest sexual excitations of youthful human beings are
invariably of an incestuous character.”
The incest taboo only existed, Freud
argued, because of this natural propensity.

a
*
;
f
» |
. ; =
. a %
pons

+p apteearmrenemmg fe
: ad ‘

ws .
ag .f a

&F¥ -S4

RS Te

B® RES t
i aoa € fe : é
i Si nage af. E oe
a a ee oe

wage}

Freud’s challenge carried the day
and became the standard view throughout the social and biological sciences.
Consequently, the question was: Why
do all societies repress this natural inclination? Biologists argued that the incest taboo protected us from dangers
of inbreeding; sociologists argued that
it was necessary to prevent sexual rivalry that would destroy the family;
and anthropologists saw the real purpose of the taboo as forcing families to
exchange women in marriage.

In parts of South China people commonly adopted and reared their sons’
wives, many women nursing their future daughters-in-law. In addition to
comparing these marriages with those
in which the bridal pair did not meet
until their wedding day, the book uses
a wide range of research—from studies
of nonhuman primates to reports of
incestuous child abuse—from African
divorce practices to animal behavior
—to demonstrate that Westermarck
was right and Freud wrong. It shows
that there is a critical period in human
development—approximately the first
thirty months of life—during which association permanently inhibits sexual
attraction. It concludes that the incest
taboo is unnecessary and cannot be explained in functional terms, and that
encouraging early association between
father and daughter is probably the
best way of preventing sexual abuse.

Arthur P. Wolf is Professor of Anthropology at Stanford University. He
is the co-author of Marriage and Adoption in China, 1845-1945 (Stanford,
1980).

136

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 43, No. 1-2

DYNAMICS OF HUMAN REPRODUCTION:
BioLoGy, BIOMETRY, DEMOGRAPHY:
By James W. Wood. Foundations
of Human Behavior Series, Aldine
de Gruyter, New York, 1994. 653
pages. $79.95, cloth. $39.95, paper.

A true tour-de-force, Wood’s book
weaves the physiological, demographic, and biometric approaches
to human fertility together to answer
the question: ‘““Why does fertility, the
number of live births, vary from couple
to couple within any particular population, and from population to population across the human species as a
whole?”

The first of its three major sections
examines the concept of natural fertility and provides a framework for analyzing the proximate behavioral and
biological determinants of natural fertility. The second section investigates
in detail the major proximate determinants. The third section attempts to
show how the various determinants act
jointly and interact, resulting in a particular observed level of reproduction.
The analytical framework developed at
the start of the book is carried through
consistently, so that the reader gains a
sense of how variation in natural fertility is caused by the same set of factors operating differentially in different populations.

Over two-hundred figures effectively illustrate the material covered in
the text. A fifty-page list of references
concludes the work.

Wood’s work is a necessity for the
library of all researchers in human fertility, whether demographers, reproductive biologists, or anthropologists
and will doubtless be well used as a

 

Book Notes

graduate textbook for many years to
come.

James W. Wood is Professor of Anthropology and Senior Scientist, Population Research Institute, at Pennsylvania State University.

MEDICAL RESOURCES OF THE TROPICAL
FoREST: BIODIVERSITY AND [Ts ImPORTANCE TO HUMAN HEALTH: -By
Michael J. Balick, Elaine Elisabetsky, and Sarah A. Laird (eds.).
Columbia University Press, New
York, 1996. 440 pages. $75, cloth.
$35, paper.

According to World Health Organization estimates, some 80 per cent of
people living in developing countries
rely on wild harvested plants for some
aspect of their primary health care.
This book will open readers’ eyes to
the enormous resources of the Earth’s
rainforests, to the potential impact of
their destruction in terms of human
health, and to the modern-day usefulness of traditional herbal remedies.

More than fifty authors, with expertise in botany, anthropology, and pharmacology call attention to the ways in
which the natural habitats of these
plants can be protected from damage
or destruction. They provide detailed
information on establishing drug discovery efforts, laying the groundwork
for a basic pool of knowledge for pharmaceutical companies and smallerscale entrepreneurs. The book also explores the ethical issue of intellectual
property rights pertaining to tropical
resources and their diverse medicinal

uses.
Michael J. Balick is Director and
Philecology Curator at The New York

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

 

Botanical Institute of Economic Botany, New York Botanic Garden, and
Adjunct Professor in Forestry at Yale
University and the City University of
New York. Elaine Elisabetsky is Professor at the Laboratorio de Ethnofarmacologia, Universidade Federal do
Rio Grande do Sul in Brazil. Sarah A.
Laird is Research Fellow of the Rainforest Alliance, and former Director of
the Rainforest Alliance’s Periwinkle
Project.

RESHAPING THE FEMALE Bopy: THE DILEMMA OF COSMETIC SURGERY: By
Kathy Davis. Routledge, New
York, 1995. 206 pages. $55, cloth.
$16.95, paper.

Davis probes the psychological
roots of the “surgical fix” craze. Davis
cautions readers of the dangers in such
procedures as tummy tucks, silicone
breast implants, stomach stapling, and
liposuctions, which not only require
hospitalization but carry a 30 to 50 per
cent chance of side effects.

Denouncing medical practitioners
who fail to inform patients of the surgery’s potential risks and hardships,
Davis turns to the question of why any
woman would want to go through
something so costly, painful, and risky.
Davis did several years’ research and
fieldwork to answer the question, interviewing cosmetic surgery recipients
from a diversity of socioeconomic
backgrounds. In Holland, where cosmetic surgery was covered by national
health insurance until recently, she observed consultations on “‘scientific”’ criteria for deciding which bodies were
“normal” and which were not.

Amazingly, Davis found that making the decision to undergo cosmetic

 

Book Notes

Social Biology

surgery actually empowered women.
Many of her subjects felt that their alterations had enabled them to become
the persons they had always wanted to
be. Cosmetic surgery, Davis discovered, could be a strategy for becoming
an ‘‘embodied subject”’ instead of an
“objectified body.” Offering ‘‘the
promise of anonymity” to women who
can no longer endure what they experience as an unsightly defect, cosmetic
surgery is “first and foremost about
identity, about wanting to be ordinary
rather than beautiful,” the author
observes.

Most of the women Davis studied
had to overcome considerable opposition to have cosmetic surgery, making
their transformations a personal victory. “They displayed an unmistakable
elation at having acted by themselves
and for themselves often for the first
time,’ Davis writes. “They did not
seem any more duped by the feminine
beauty system than those who do not
see cosmetic surgery as a remedy to
their problems with appearance.” To
her further surprise, Davis reports, her
subjects were generally satisfied with
the surgery, regardless of often disappointing results.

Davis stresses the need for providing counseling services for women who
are pondering the surgical gamble.
And she calls for meaningful dialogue
about the practice in feminist circles, in
a forum that accommodates women’s
feelings about why they want to alter
their bodies.

Kathy Davis is Associate Professor
in the Department of Women’s Studies
at the University of Utrecht in the
Netherlands. She is the author of
Power Under the Microscope.
Vol. 43, No. 1-2

THE HUMAN BIOLOGY OF THE ENGLISH
VILLAGE: By G. Ainsworth Harrison. Research Monographs on Human Population Biology No. 12,
Oxford University Press, New
York, 1995. 147 pages. $80, cloth.

This fascinating monograph summarizes the work of the staff of the De_, partment of Biological Anthropology

= at Oxford from 1965 to 1980 in analyz< ing in minute detail the human biology
& of a small group of villages in the Ot5 moor region of the County of Oxford® shire.

The Otmoor villages, with parish
records dating back 1572, seemed to
=. offer a natural population, meaning
~~ one that shared a common gene pool,
~ broadly similar environmental condi= tions, and acommon set of cultural and
2 historical traditions. The villages lie
S only 6-10 miles from Oxford, offering
‘6 proximity to researchers whose inten& sive study of the populations necessi< tated many hours of interviewing and
5 measuring subjects, repeatedly, and
~ over different time spans.

:-47 08 Decem

Downloaded by

Book Notes

139

From 1965 to 1969, the historical demography of the villages was undertaken from parish records. From 197075, some two thousand villagers were
studied, providing blood samples for
genetic analysis in addition to filling
out questionnaires, taking parts of the
Wechsler adult intelligence test, completing the Eysenck Personality Inventory, as well as being measured for various anthropometric dimensions. From
1976-80 residents answered both a lifestyle and a health questionnaire as well
as providing timed urine samples analyzed for catecholamine output rate.

The monograph chapters cover: demographic structure: past and present;
occupation and social class; movement
and ancestry structure; biological variety and genetic structure; marriage, social mobility, and population structure;
the biology of everyday life; and
health. A final chapter contributed by
Gabriel W. Lasker covers evidence
from surnames on the population
structure of villages surrounding the
Otmoor. A bibliography completes the
monograph.
