Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Diseases determined by major genes

N. E. Morton

To cite this article: N. E. Morton (1979) Diseases determined by major genes, Social Biology,
26:2, 94-103, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1979.9988368

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1979.9988368

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
oe | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 3
N
Q View related articles 4

wa Citing articles: 4 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Diseases Determined by Major Genes

N.E. Morton

Population Genetics Laboratory
University of Hawaii
Honolulu, Hawaii

 

ABSTRACT: The rise of genetic epidemiology, its development from inspection of data to analysis of
major loci, applications to recurrence risks, and the countercurrent of ideological opposition are

described.

Genetic epidemiology is concerned
with etiology, distribution, and control of
disease in relatives, and with inherited
causes of disease in populations. Inherited
is used in a broad sense to include both
biological and cultural inheritance, where
cultural subsumes any environmental factor distributed nonrandomly among families (Morton and Chung, 1978).

Genetic epidemiology has roots in
older studies of space-time clustering of
disease. Maupertuis described dominant
segregation of an extra finger in the eighteenth century, but Mendel more than a
century later had the realization that
created genetics:

Among all the numerous experiments

made, not one has been carried out to such

an extent and in such a way as to make it
possible to determine the number of
different forms under which the offspring of
hybrids appear, or to arrange these forms
with certainty according to their separate
generations, or definitely to ascertain their
statistical relations (Mendel, 1865, translated by the Royal Horticultural Society of
London, reprinted in Peters, 1959).

Mendel was rediscovered at the beginning of this century, and within a few years
the German physician Weinberg (1908, p.
368) recognized that “‘In the case of man,
the statistical evaluation of mass phenom
94

ena must substitute, in a poor way, for experiments.” From this understanding that
clinical impression is a makeshift for
statistical analysis, Weinberg, Lenz, and
Bernstein developed early mathematical
approaches, which ended when Hitler
came to power in Germany. A few years
later, Stalin liquidated human genetics in
Russia. By then the spark had been transmitted to Fisher and Haldane in England
and to Wright and Snyder in America. At
midcentury a methodology had been developed appropriate to simple Mendelian
traits.

The end of World War II ushered in the
computer age, which for the first time permitted study of complex inheritance in
which risks vary among families of a given
mating type. Sporadic cases (which might
be transmissible mutants or nontransmissible phenocopies) were introduced (Morton, 1958). At about the same time,
efficient and reliable methods to locate
genes on chromosomes were advanced
(Morton, 1955). Inbreeding was developed into a tool for resolving the mutational load of deleterious genes (Morton
et al., 1956) as an outgrowth of studies on
genetic effects of atomic radiation (Neel
and Schull, 1956).

Neel and Schull (1954) were apparently

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 26, No. 2

the first to recognize that these events
were forging a new discipline of “epidemiological genetics” concerned with interaction of heredity and disease. During
the next decade Blumberg (1961) edited
Genetic Polymorphisms and Geographic
Variations in Disease, and Neel, Shaw, et
al. (1965) produced Genetics and the Epidemiology of Chronic Diseases in which
Thomas Francis remarked:

So when the human geneticist turns to
diseases and disorder in the population as
the basis of genetic analysis, he is promptly
in epidemiology. And when he asserts the
concept of multiple factors to produce an
effect, he is in full cry epidemiologically.
Conversely, where the epidemiologist
seeks explanation for familial or other
group aggregations of health or disease, he
is immediately involved in genetic probems.

By 1967, when Morton, Chung, and Mi
discussed problems in genetic epidemiology, there was a general agreement
that synthesis of goal and methods from
epidemiology and genetics was inevitable
and desirable. We preferred the term
“genetic epidemiology” because determinants of familial aggregation may be
purely environmental, whereas ‘“‘epidemiological genetics” suggests an inappropriate prejudice against environmental
hypotheses. Without commitment to any
label, the growing consensus is reflected
by such recent books as Genetics, Environment, and Behavior (Ehrman,
Omenn, and Caspari, 1972), Geneenvironment Interaction in Common Diseases (Japan Medical Research Foundation, 1977), Genetic Epidemiology
(Morton and Chung, 1978), and The
Genetic Analysis of Common Diseases
(Sing and Skolnick, 1979).

Although genetic epidemiology is too
young a Science to have attracted historians or philosophers, it is tempting to
speculate why it has emerged as a distinct
discipline only within the last decade.

 

Diseases Determined By Major Genes 95

Serious medical interest did not begin until public health measures had reduced the
impact of infectious disease in industrial
societies. Epidemiology should span all
causes of disease, but traditionally genetic
factors were excluded either because they
demanded an unfamiliar methodology or
because they were illogically assumed to
be unresponsive to environmental intervention. Quantitative geneticists are preoccupied by improvement of domestic
plants and animals through artificial selection. Evolutionary geneticists are concerned with interpretation of events leading to speciation. All these disciplines are
more familiar with paradigms of experimental biology than with the statistical
evaluation of mass phenomena which is
the basis of astronomy, epidemiology, and
many other sciences. Studies in animals by
Sewall Wright and others have been
seminal; but man is the only organism for
which concern about etiology and risk for
disease generates strong and persistent interest in dissecting the contributions of
genes and environment to family resemblance. Emergence of a discipline at
the interface of genetics and epidemiology, concerned with contemporary
health-related problems that include major loci, chromosomal aberrations, polygenes, and cultural inheritance was inevitable but required a long gestation. When
the history of genetic epidemiology is written, I believe that the coming decade will
be seen as the period of most rapid
growth, to which this symposium can be
no more than prologue.

INSPECTION OF DATA

Many criteria have been used to suggest the significance of genetic factors ina
trait of unknown etiology, including: (1)
an elevated risk in relatives compared
with the general population, (2) greater
concordance of the trait in identical than

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

96 Morton

in fraternal twins, (3) an excess of consanguineous parentage for a presumed recessive trait, (4) failure of the trait to
“spread” to unrelated individuals, (5) onset at a characteristic age without a known
precipitating event, (6) variation among
populations and behavior on outcrossing
in accordance with genetic theory, and (7)
occurrence of a homologous, inherited
condition in other mammals.

Consideration of these criteria is
sufficient to show that individually and
conjointly they cannot be regarded as rigorous evidence of a genetic etiology. The
genetic method consists in showing that a
trait could be due to one of several simple
modes of inheritance. Classically, these
are dominant or recessive, autosomal or
sex-linked, with clear differences in transmission pattern (Morton, 1962). However, when multifactorial causes are introduced, both genetic and cultural,
inspection of pedigrees becomes so unreliable that it is useful only to suggest hypotheses for formal test.

SEGREGATION ANALYSIS

An important class of problems involves detection and characterization of
major loci at which single genes (usually
rare) have substantial effects on disease
susceptibility as reflected by high ‘“‘penetrance”’ (i.e., alarge proportion of the susceptible genotype defined by one locus is
affected in all multifactorial backgrounds). The background typically includes many genes of small effect which
usually cannot be distinguished (polygenes) as well as numerous environmental
effects which may in part be familial
(cultural inheritance). By natural
broadening of ‘‘segregation,” which in
classical genetics means the separation of
allele pairs and their distribution to
different gametes, segregation analysis
deals with the transmission of a qualitative

Social Biology

or quantitative trait in families and the test
of major loci against multifactorial alternatives.

For the first half-century after rediscovery of Mendel’s work, human geneticists
concentrated on traits that approximated
Mendelian inheritance, at least in some
pedigrees. McKusick (1978) lists 1,364
“proven” loci, many of which were discovered during this early period (Table 1).
A slightly larger number are ‘‘in limbo,”
either because allelism with another mutant is suspected or because the evidence
for a major gene is not compelling. Some
of the latter failures are due to small numbers of observations; others, to the notorious difficulty of discriminating a major locus from multifactorial disease
susceptibility (Edwards, 1960). R. A.
Fisher provided the basic tools in his
theory of maximum likelihood, and
Haldane (1949) made the initial application to man when he tested for an excess of
isolated cases of albinism which might be
sporadic phenocopies. Generalization of
this approach became feasible with the advent of computers (Morton, 1958) and a
mixture of two distributions was resolved—the high-risk group corresponding to major loci and the low-risk group to
the multifactorial background (Morton,
1969). A multifactorial model was introduced, comparison of the two approaches
giving an approximate test for major loci
(Morton, Yee, et al., 1970).

At this point, Elston and Stewart
(1971) took an important step. Until then,
all analyses had taken children conditional
on parental phenotypes. They showed
how likelihoods for larger pedigrees could
be calculated, under restrictions that were
progressively removed (Cannings et al.,
1978). They also introduced a generalized
single-locus model with transmission frequencies that take Mendelian values of 1,
1/2, 0 for the three genotypes in the absence of cultural inheritance.

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 26, No. 2

 

Diseases Determined By Major Genes 97

TABLE I
Gene Loci 1N MOUSE AND MAN*

Geng Loci

Autosomal dominant .................
Autosomal recesSive ............00000.
Sex-linked.... 0... 0... cee ee eee eee

*Data from McKusick, 1978

This model holds for any combination
of major loci and polygenes. Therefore, if
the transmission frequencies are not
significantly different from Mendelian values, we suspect that genetic factors are
important; but we cannot say from this
analysis whether cultural inheritance
might be simulating genetic inheritance or
whether a major locus is present. Conversely, if the transmission frequencies are
significantly non-Mendelian, this fact suggests that cultural inheritance is present,
but does not exclude a genetic component, either polygenic or major locus. We
cannot be sure that ascertainment bias,
which presents unsolved problems in pedigrees, is not distorting the evidence.

For the generalized single-locus model,
as currently formulated, estimates of major locus gene frequencies apply to the selected pedigree, and not to the population
from which it was drawn; with concomitant polygenic or cultural inheritance, the
gene frequency estimate is meaningless.
Because of these difficulties, advocates of
the generalized single-locus model regard
it as a preliminary test, critical evidence
for a major locus requiring assignment by
linkage analysis to a particular chromosome (Elston, 1979). This paradigm has
not yet been successful for any locus which
was not obvious on inspection of pedigrees.

Critics of the generalized single-locus
model prefer a mixed model which in
Man
Moust Proven In imbo
194 736 753
222 521 596
16 107 98
432 1,364 1,447

cludes cultural inheritance, polygenes,
and a major locus simultaneously. This
approach was suggested by Carter (1969)
for pyloric stenosis (where a major locus
has yet to be proven) and was used to identify major loci as ‘“‘leading factors” in animal experiments (Wright, 1968). It has
been implemented in nuclear families consisting of children and their parents (Morton and MacLean, 1974) for a number of
traits, confirming major loci for hyper-Bcholesterolemia, the Lp antigen, immunoglobulin E, and PTC taste sensitivity, but giving negative evidence for
hypertriglyceridemia, hyperuricemia,
blood pressure, and other traits for which
inspection of pedigrees had suggested a
major locus to some investigators (Morton and Chung, 1978). Current effort is toward extension of the mixed model to pedigrees sampled through affected
members. There is no doubt that, despite
formidable computational problems, the
mixed model provides the most incisive
segregation analysis, and it would be surprising if the generalized single-locus
model and other preliminary tests persisted into the eighties.

LINKAGE ANALYSIS

Once a major locus has been detected
and its gene frequencies and effects have
been estimated, the next step is to place it
in the chromosome map, which consists of

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

98 Morton Social Biology
PGD PGD
ENGI 3.9 1 ENO! ENO}
1 ELI
ENO] FUCA 19. 0 EU) 19 r
rae 33. 93 FUCA 26. 6 7 FUCK
32.14 5¢
re AK2 36.6 1 SC 33°48 T BSaPK
FUCA 37.6 7 UMPK
UMPK | ;
UMPK 53.4 | PGMI 48.6 + PGM
PGMI
86.4 + AMY AMY
103.2+ 01012. 99-7 F O1AN2
108.2 + FY,CAE] 108.2 + FY,CAE]
UGPP |
|
UGPP 137.5 7 PEPC

PEPC

GUK]

pepc,fH 7 FH

RNS5S

 

Cotransference

Physical

Genetic Nonparametric

Fig. 1—Physical and genetic maps of Chromosome 1 (Rao et al, 1979).

23 linear structures corresponding to 22
pairs of autosomes and the X chromosomes. Each chromosome pair is characterized by its banding pattern and distribution of chiasmata. Methods have been
developed to detect linkage reliably in
small samples (Morton, 1956) and to construct maximum-likelihood maps from
data on recombination between linked
loci (Morton, 1979). Somatic cell hybridization locates genes which may be invariant within our species, in which case they
permit phylogenetic comparisons but are
not useful for genetic epidemiology. Figure 1 shows the present state of knowledge
about recombination in males for Chromosome 1, the largest human chromosome. The genetic map for females is
about 1.8 times the male length. As the
number of mapped loci increases, use of
linked markers will become more feasible
in genetic counseling to predict the carrier
state for disease with delayed onset. Distinction of allelic associations from closely
linked loci presents a special problem.

Genes for susceptibility to juvenile diabetes, ankylosing spondylitis, hemochromatosis, cerebellar ataxia, and many other
diseases are located with the HLA region
of Chromosome 6, but low penetrance,
delayed onset, linkage disequilibrium,
and unknown gene frequency and segregation parameters make resolution
difficult. Improvements in statistical
methods are under way.

POPULATION STRUCTURE

Statistical analysis of consanguineous
marriages, which bring together genes
identical by descent, provides information
about numbers of loci, gene frequencies,
and mutation rates for rare recessives
(Morton et al., 1956; Morton, 1975). Recognized consanguinity is only one aspect
of population structure. Often genealogies are incomplete, but geographic distribution can still provide evidence of remote consanguinity, which falls off nearly
exponentially from the center of gene ori
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 26, No. 2

 

Diseases Determined By Major Genes 99

I C1067 ) C POSSIBLE CARRIER SIBSHIP
MWAHUELE OR sist with ONE OR MORE
I
I
IW 1075 )
¥ Co9s9)
INEKINIA
NI
.
vm ap EF cp Gp EB cD.

Fig. 2—Ethnohistory of achromatopsia (Hussels and Morton, 1972).

gin (Malécot, 1948). During the sixties
there was rapid development of methods
to determine genetic kinship from migration, genealogy, and phenotype bioassay
(Morton, 1973). The importance of kinship is that it allows genotype frequencies
to be inferred from gene frequencies,
thereby giving estimates of genetic risks
and inferences about selective pressures,
population origins, and genetic drift. By
chance, genes rare in the general population often “drift” to substantial frequencies in small isolated populations (called
demes or isolates). Figure 2 shows part of a
pedigree for achromatopsia, a rare eye
disease transmitted from one survivor of a
typhoon two hundred years ago on Pingelap atoll (Hussels and Morton, 1972).
Now 5 per cent of the islanders are
affected.

There are many examples of such
chance fluctuations in gene frequency,
which though unlikely for any particular
gene are probable for at least one of many
genes in a small population. When the

 

time scale is extended, the precise historical event which gave rise to drift is forgotten, and the possibility must be considered
that high gene frequency is due to some
obscure local selective pressure on heterozygotes. For example, cystic fibrosis is
rare in the tropics but reaches a disease
frequency of 1/3,800 in Western Europe,
substantially greater than the frequency of
Tay-Sachs disease in Ashkenazi Jews. For
such diseases, drift seems the likely explanation in the absence of compelling
evidence for heterozygote advantage
(Rao and Morton, 1973; Ewens, 1978).
Fortunately, most questions in genetic
epidemiology depend on the statistical
evaluation of contemporary mass phenomena, and the historical uncertainties
of evolutionary genetics are rarely approached.

SOME EXAMPLES

Among the thousands of diseases in
man, I shall take four to illustrate these
principles: hyper-B-cholesterolemia, hy
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

100

peruricemia, limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, and Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

During the last century, British physicians defined ‘‘xanthoma tuberosum
multiplex”’ on the basis of lipid deposition
in skin and tendons, often associated with
cardiovascular disease in families. As
early as 1908, Gossage suggested a dominant gene, but proof did not come until
about 1920 with reliable methods to
measure cholesterol. It was then realized
that extreme disease is characteristic of
homozygotes, but heterozygotes have elevated beta cholesterol. Prevention of cardiovascular disease 1n these families requires reduction of plasma cholesterol.
Even small families segregating for this
gene, which has a frequency of only 0.001,
can be recognized and the elevation
shown not to be due to polygenes or
cultural inheritance, both of which have
significant effects on cholesterol level
(Rao et al., 1979). Goldstein and Brown
(1973) have shown that the primary defect, demonstrable in fibroblasts, is a lack
of feedback suppression for cholesterol
synthesis. For the kinetics of this reaction
they have inferred two different alleles for
hyper-B-cholesterolemia (Goldstein et
al., 1977), illustrating the complementary
role of statistical and biochemical analysis. For genes with milder effects on disease susceptibility, biochemical resolution
may be necessary before statistical analysis is feasible. Whatever the order of discovery, one approach supports and validates the other.

Gout is a characteristic type of painful
arthritis, related to elevated uric acid (hyperuricemia). Recognition of this disease
goes back the fifth century B.c., but disagreement about its inheritance has persisted until recent years. Even in the same
families with gout, Smyth et al. (1948) argued for a dominant gene, while Neel, Rakic, et al. (1965) favored polygenes or

Morton

Social Biology

cultural inheritance for most cases. Developments in complex segregation analysis
support the latter interpretation (Morton,
ms.). Probably for that reason, the biochemistry ts poorly understood. Although
polygenic or cultural inheritance seems to
account for most cases of gout in Caucasians, the etiology of hyperuricemia is heterogeneous. A sex-linked gene for
deficiency of the enzyme HGPRT (hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase) causes hyperuricemia and the bizarre Lesch-Nyhan disease, characterized
by mental deficiency and self-mutilation
(Seegmiller, 1976). Less extreme alleles
cause gout, but are rare in the gouty population. Patients with recessive glucose-6phosphatase deficiency are hyperuricemic, and a few families suggesting a
dominant gene for hyperuricemia with
nephropathy have been descibed. Two
observations suggest major loci in certain
populations: a glutathione reductase isozyme in Negro populations has been reported to cause gout (Long, 1967), and
Blumberg (1965) has proposed that hyperuricemia in Micronesia may be due to
an unusual frequency of secretors of
BAIB (f-amino-isobutyric acid), which
in other populations is generally attributed to a recessive gene. Etiological heterogeneity makes hyperuricemia.a fertile
field, despite negative evidence for a major locus in Caucasian samples.
Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy exists
in two forms: a recessive type with an elevated frequency of consanguineous parentage and a sporadic type unrelated to inbreeding (Morton and Chung, 1959). It
has been suggested that sporadics may include rare expression in heterozygotes of a
usually recessive gene, as is known to occur in the sex-linked Duchenne form.
However, these studies were done at a
time when differential diagnosis of polymyositis and neuropathy was less certain,
and before efficient tests for heterozygous

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 2

carriers were introduced. The etiology
and frequency of sporadic cases should be
reinvestigated, since it determines the recurrence risk for parents of isolated cases.

Duchenne muscular dystrophy is a sexlinked disease which affects males and
some chromosomally abnormal females,
the fertility of male patients being too low
to produce a homozygote. Although carrier detection is fairly good, there is disagreement about the proportion of cases
which are sporadic due to fresh mutation,
which maintains the gene in the population despite low fertility of patients (Morton and Lalouel, in press).

RECURRENCE RISKS

Even for simple modes of inheritance,
some parameters must be estimated from
the data, most rigorously by segregation
analysis which also determines polygenic
and cultural inheritance. These parameters may then be used to provide a specific
recurrence risk for a unique family, with
as much assurance as the input data justify. Often these calculations can be done
with reasonable accuracy by hand, but
computer assistance must be invoked for
diseases with mutation, incomplete penetrance, etiological heterogeneity, or
significant polygenic or cultural inheritance. Replacement of crude empirical
tisks by specific and more reliable ones
based on segregation analysis is one of the
promising developments in genetic epidemiology (Lalouel, 1978).

DISCUSSION

Human genetics is the most sensitive of
all sciences to ideological attack. Cor
Diseases Determined By Major Genes

101

rupted in Nazi Germany, it was destroyed
in Russia a decade before the rest of
genetics surrendered to Lysenkoism. The
same forces are at play in the West and
affect the new science of genetic epidemiology. So far, studies of major genes
have not aroused the irrational opposition
of groups which attack biometrical
genetics because of IQ, genetic counseling
because of heritability, and population cytogenetics because of XYY behavior. It is
happenstance that the XYY trait is chromosomal, and failure to extend the witchhunt to major genes may be only a lull in
the storm.

The battle lines between science and
antiscientism are clearly drawn. Without
betraying the culture that supports it,
genetic epidemiology can accept no constraint on analysis of data obtained in an
ethical manner to test scientific theory.
The republic of science will not be safe,
and genetic epidemiology will not realize
its potential to understand and eventually
control the major diseases and causes of
death, until militant hereditarians and environmentalists alike are perceived as
trespassing demagogues.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by Grant GM
17173 from the U.S. National Institutes of
Health. The original version of this paper was
presented at the symposium “Genetics in Epidemiology,” sponsored by the AAAS Sections
on Biological and Medical Sciences, the Society for the Study of Social Biology, and the
American Public Health Association at the
Annual Meeting of the American Association
for the Advancement of Science, Houston,
Texas, January 4, 1979.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

102

Morton

Social Biology

REFERENCES

BLUMBERG. B. S. (ed.). 1961. Genetic polymorphisms and geographic variations in disease. Grune and Stratton, New York.

. 1965. Heredity of gout and hyperuricemia. Arthrit. Rheumat. 8:627-647.

CANNINGS, C., E. A. THOMPSON, and M.
SKOLNICK. 1978. Probability functions on
complex pedigrees. Adv. Appl. Prob.
10:26-61.

CarRTER, C. O. 1969. Genetics of common disorders. Brit. Med. Bull. 25:52-57.

Epwarops, J. H. 1960. The simulation of Mendelism. Acta Genet. Statist. Med. 10:63-70.

Exnrman, L., G. S. OMENN, and E. Caspar!
(eds.). 1972. Genetics, environment, and behavior. Academic Press, New York.

Exston, R. C. 1979. Likelihood models in human
quantitative genetics. In C. F. Sing and M.
Skolnick (eds.), The genetic analysis of common diseases. Alan Liss Publishing, New
York.

Eston, R. C., and J. STrEwarT. 1971. A general
model for the genetic analysis of pedigree
data. Genetics 73:695-711.

Ewens, W. J. 1978. Tay-Sachs disease and theoretical population genetics. Editorial: Amer.
J. Hum. Genet. 30:328-329.

GOLDSTEIN, J. L., and M. S. Brown. 1973. Familial hypercholesterolemia: identification of
defect in the regulation of 3-hydroxy-3methylglutary! coenzyme A reductase activity
associated with overproduction of cholesterol. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 70:2804—2808.

GOLDSTEIN, J. L., M.S. Brown, andN. J. STONE.
1977. Genetics of the LDL receptor. Evidence
that the mutations affecting binding and internalization are allelic. Cell 12:629-641.

HALDANngE, J. B. S. 1949. A test for homogeneity
of records of familial abnormalities. Ann.
Eugen. 14:339-341.

HussEts, J. E., and N. E. Morton. 1972. Pingelap and Mokil atolls: Achromatopsia. Amer.
J. Hum. Genet. 24:304~309.

JAPAN MEDICAL RESEARCH FOUNDATION (ed.).
1977. Gene-environment interaction in common diseases. Univ. of Tokyo Press, Tokyo.

LaLou_EL, J. M. 1978. Recurrence risks in segregation analysis, p. 255-284. In N. E. Morton
and C. S. Chung (eds.), Genetic epidemiology. Academic Press, New York.

Lona, W. K. 1967. Glutathione reductase in red
blood cells: Variant associated with gout.
Science 155:712-713.

MaLEcot, G. 1948. Les mathématiques de
Vhérédite. Masson, Paris.

McKusick, V. A. 1978. Mendelian inheritance in
man. 5th ed. Johns Hopkins Univ. Press,
Baltimore.

Morton, N. E. 1955. Sequential tests for the detection of linkage. Amer. J. Hum. Genet.
7:277-318.

 

. 1956. The detection and estimation of

linkage between the genes for elliptocytosis

and the Rh blood type. Amer. J. Hum. Genet.

8:80-96.

. 1958. Segregation analysis in human

genetics. Science 127:79-80.

, 1962. Segregation and linkage, p. 17-52.

In W. J. Burdette (ed.), Methodology in hu
man genetics. Holden-Day, San Francisco.

.1969. Segregation analysis, p. 129-139. In

N. E. Morton (ed.), Computer applications in

genetics. Univ. of Hawaii Press, Honolulu.

(ed.). 1973. Genetic structure of popula
tions. Univ. of Hawaii Press, Honolulu.

. 1975. Kinship fitness, and evolution, p.

133-154. In F. M. Salzano (ed.), The role of

natural selection in human evolution. North
Holland Publishing, Amsterdam.

. 1979. Analysis of crossing over in man. In

J. L. Hamerton (ed.), Human gene mapping 4

(in press)

. Genetics of hyperuricemia in families
with gout (ms. in preparation).

Morton, N. E., and C. S. CHuna. 1959. Formal
genetics of muscular dystrophy. Amer. J.
Hum. Genet. 11:360-379.

(eds.). 1978. Genetic epidemiology. Academic Press, New York.

Morton, N. E., and J. M. Latouver. Genetic
counseling in sex linkage. In 1978 Birth Defects Workshop—San Francisco. Original Article Series, The National Foundation, New
York (in press).

Morton, N, E., and C. J. MacLean. 1974. Analysis of family resemblance. III. Complex segregation of quantitative traits. Amer. J. Hum.
Genet. 26:489-503.

Morton, N. E., C. S. Cuunea, and M. P. Mt.
1967. Genetics of interracial crosses in Hawali. S. Karger, Basel.

Morton, N. E., J. F. Crow, and H. J. MuLrer.
1956. An estimate of the mutational damage
in man from data on consanguineous marriages. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 42:855-863.

Morton, N. E., S. YEE, R. C. Exsron, et al.
1970. Discontinuity and quasi-continuity: Alternative hypothesis of multifactorial inheritance. Clin. Genet. 1:81-94.

NEEL, J. V., and W. J. ScHULL. 1954. Human
heredity. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

. 1956. The effect of exposure to the
atomic bombs on pregnancy termination in
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. National Research
Council, Vol. 16, p. 241. National Academy
of Sciences, Washington, D.C.

NEEL, J. V., M. T. Rakic, R. I. Davipson, et al.
1965. Studies of hyperuricemia. IT. A reconsideration of the distribution of serum uric acid
values in the families of Smyth, Cotterman,
and Freyberg. Amer. J. Hum. Genet.
17:14—22.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
—|
=
©
N
hl
oO
=
oO
O
oO
A
Co
©
CO
og)
oN
=
—
CS
'S
w
oN
=
a
O
5
Cn
©
>>
—
=
N
—
oO
>
=
c
~,
a
Oo
vo
oO
co
oS
©
—
c
5
©
a

 

 

Vol. 26, No. 2

NEEL, J. V., M. W. SHaw, and W. J. ScHULL.
1965. Genetics and the epidemiology of
chronic diseases. DHEW, Public Health Service Publ. 1163. Washington, D.C.

Peters, J. A. (ed.). 1959. Classic papers in
genetics. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.

Rao, D. C., B. Keats, J. M. LALOuEL, et al. A
maximum likelihood map of chromosome 1
(in preparation).

Rao, D. C., and N. E. Morton. 1973. Large deviations in the distribution of rare genes.
Amer. J. Hum. Genet, 25:594-597.

Rao, D. C., N. E. Morton, C. L. GULBRANDSEN,
et al. 1979. Cultural and biological determinants of lipoprotein concentrations. Ann.
Hum. Genet. (in press).

SEEGMILLER, J. E. 1976. Inherited deficiency of
hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase in X-linked uric aciduria (the Lesch
Diseases Determined By Major Genes 103

Nyhan syndrome and its variants), p. 75-145.
In H. Harris and K. Hirschhorn (eds.), Advances in human genetics. Plenum Press, New
York.

SinG, C. F., and M. SKOLNIcK (eds.). 1979. The
genetic analysis of common diseases: Applications to predictive factors in coronary heart
disease. Alan Liss Publishing, New York.

SMYTH, C. J., C. W. CoTTERMAN, and R. H. Frey
BERG. 1948. The genetics of gout and hyperuricemia—an analysis of nineteen families. J.
Clin. Invest. 25:749-759.

WEINBERG, W. 1908. Uber den Nachweis der
Vererbung beim Menschen. Jahresh. Verein
f. vater}. Naturk. Wiirttem. 64:368—382.

WRIGHT, S. 1968. Evolution and the genetics of
populations, Vol. 1. Genetic and biometric
foundations. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

 

 
