Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

The genetics of alcohol consumption in animals

John L. Fuller

To cite this article: John L. Fuller (1985) The genetics of alcohol consumption in animals, Social
Biology, 32:3-4, 210-221, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1985.9988609

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1985.9988609

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:40

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

The Genetics of Alcohol Consumption in Animals

John L. Fuller

Department of Psychology,
State University of New York at Binghamton,
Binghamton, New York

 

ABSTRACT: This paper reviews animal studies of genetic differences in the consumption of alcohol. It deals with six areas: (1) field observations in nature; (2) selective breeding; (3) variation
among inbred strains; (4) correlates of ethanol preference and avoidance; (5) consumption and
sensitivity; and (6) a test of an ethanol intake control system. Because of space constraints it is
selective rather than exhaustive. The results of experiments demonstrate that genes have a
strong effect on alcohol consumption when animals are given a choice of liquids. Both preabsorptive and postabsorptive factors can modify intake. There are similarities in factors that
affect alcohol consumption in animals and those believed to be operative in humans. Evidence
for an ethanol intake control system is presented.

Research on the genetics of alcohol
consumption in animals preceded the
studies on sensitivity, tolerance, and dependence that will be discussed by other
contributors to this volume. Although
behavioral techniques are emphasized
in studies of consumption, attention is
also given to physiology, pharmacology,
and biochemistry. The combination of
behavioral and biological techniques
provides insights into the basis of heritable differences in alcohol preference
and aversion.

The specific genetic factors affecting
alcohol consumption in rats and mice
may not be identical with those in humans, but there are interesting parallels.
Just as there are alcoholic and totally abstinent humans, there are mice that
drink almost no plain water if 10 per cent
ethanol is available, and others who
avoid alcohol at very low concentrations. Perhaps the most important application of studies in this area is the dem
onstration that some of the models
developed from animal studies are applicable to humans. A good example is
the finding that both abstinent mouse
strains and some abstinent human ethnic groups share a genetic deficiency in
acetaldehyde dehydrogenase. A deficiency in this enzyme results in higher
than normal level of acetaldehyde, a
highly toxic substance produced during
the metabolism of alcohol.

FIELD OBSERVATIONS

Humans and their laboratory surrogates, rats and mice, are not the only
consumers of alcohol. Our New England poet, Robert Frost (1930), described the symptoms of inebriation in
“The Cow in Apple Time.” The cow’s
face is ‘flecked with pomace and she
droolsacider syrup. . . . She bellows on
a knoll against the sky . . . and the milk
goes dry.” The drunken cow and the

210
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

drunken cowherd react similarly to an
overdose of alcohol. .

Alcohol consumption in the field has
been observed in a variety of animals:
birds, raccoons, pigs, goats, horses,
bears, and a variety of primates. Siegel
(1979) conducted field experiments with
elephants and concluded that their response to encounters with alcohol is
very similar to that of humans. If alcohol
is available, elephants consume it in
amounts sufficient to induce ataxia and
aggression. It is clear that our species is
not unique in its long history of contact
with alcohol. Although such observations are interesting, it is necessary to
use genetically standardized animals in
laboratory settings if one desires to understand the basis for individual differences in coping with alcohol.

GENETIC SELECTION FOR
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION

The selection program of Kalervo
Eriksson at the Research Laboratories
of the State Alcohol Monopoly in Helsinki will serve as a model to demonstrate that the level of alcohol consumption is heritable. Two lines, the alcohol
addicted (AA) and alcohol nonaddicted (ANA), were clearly distinguishable after 16 generations of selection (Eriksson, 1969a, 1971). Separation of the lines was based on the consumption of alcohol by animals given a
choice between tap water and a 10 per
cent solution of ethanol. Alcohol consumption of AA males was 19 times that
of ANA males; for females the ratio was
slightly greater, 21:1. In the AA line
males obtained 22.8 per cent and females 24.8 per cent of their calories from
ethanol. In the ANA line the corresponding caloric intakes were 1.39 per

 

Genetics of Alcohol Consumption in Animals

211

cent for males and 1.37 per cent for females. Overall, AA rats were lighter
than ANA rats and consumed a much
larger proportion of their calories from
ethanol. Erikkson suggested that AA
rats ingest large quantities of alcohol because it is an efficient source of energy,
but calories may be less important than
other factors that result from ethanol ingestion. Another interesting finding in
the AA rats was a significantly higher intake of alcohol in females. It will be
shown later that this sex difference is not
found in all lines that have been studied.

Eriksson (1969b) estimated the parent-offspring correlation of voluntary
alcohol consumption in a random sample of 20 pairs of the AA line. His computations were primarily based on milliliters of alcohol consumed per day | body
weight in grams. There were interesting
differences between the sexes. For parents X offspring (sexes combined),
r= 0.40; p<0.01. For males < male
offspring, r = 0.16, p < 0.05; and for females x female offspring, r = 0.36,
p< 0.01. This finding demonstrates that
there was still considerable genetic variance within the AA line.

Another factor influencing alcohol
intake of these rats was habituation to
the test situation. Over time most subjects increased their alcohol intake. Intake was also influenced by addition of
saccharin or quinine to either the 10 per
cent alcohol bottle or the water bottle.
Not surprisingly, alcohol preference and
consumption increased when saccharin
was added to 10 per cent alcohol, or
when quinine was added to the water
bottle. Both the AA and ANA lines reacted similarly. However, there were
quantitative differences between the
two lines. “‘In genetically different
strains the difference in alcoho] con 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

212

sumption persists even in a strongly motivated situation. . . . The alcohol solution remains repulsive to the non-drinker rats despite the improved taste of
saccharin-alcohol, and the unpleasant
taste of quinine-water’’ (Eriksson,
1969a, p. 249).

Selection for ethanol consumption
has also been successful with mice. Anderson and McClearn (1981) reported
on a program using the genetically heterogeneous HS/Ibg as a foundation population. Measures of the consumption of
a 10 per cent alcohol solution were recorded after a 24-hour deprivation of
water. An index of consumption for an
individual was based on the ratio of the
amount of ethano] solution consumed
on the test day to the mean consumption
of water on the two days prior to the
deprivation period. At the 14th generation the mean scores were 0.38 for the
low acceptance line and 1.19 for the high
acceptance line. The mean score of nonselected control mice was 0.78. The
clear separation of scores indicates that
genes have an important role in determining alcohol intake in mice as well as
in rats.

Other investigators have employed
selection to produce lines of experimental animals that differ in their response
to alcohol in respect to sensitivity, tolerance, and dependency. The positive
results of selection demonstrates that
there is a substantial genetic component

to differences in response to alcohol. Al
though the selection approach ts valuable, it is also useful to compare alcohol
consumption in inbred strains. The genetic uniformity within a strain is an advantage for many experiments. Thus,
one can estimate the effects of environment by treating groups from an inbred
strain differently and measure the im
Fuller

Social Biology

portance of genetic differences by treating different strains identically.

INBRED STRAIN VARIATIONS

An inbred strain is a population of genetically identical individuals except for
the sex chromosomes, XX for females
and XY for males. Inbred strains of
mice have played an important part in
research on the heritability and physiological aspects of alcohol consumption.
Large strain differences in alcohol consumption have been found. These are
not the product of selection, but the
results of random fixation of a set of
genes during a long history of brothersister matings. The outcome of a program of repetitive inbreeding is unpredictable, but to the delight of
researchers it turns out that mice of
some lines are heavy drinkers and others
are teetotalers.

As an example, McClearn and
Rodgers (1959) compared alcohol consumption in five inbred strains of mice
given a choice of water or a 10 per cent
alcohol solution for a 4-week period.
CS57BL/Crgl mice strongly preferred alcohol; the other four strains generally
abstained. In contrast with Eriksson’s
rats, there were no significant sex differences in alcohol consumption. A second
experiment (Rodgers and McClearn,
1962) extended the preference studies to
a variety of alcohol concentrations from
2.5 per cent to 15 per cent. CS7BL mice
increased their preference progressively
over three weeks. C3H/2 mice started at
a low level, but showed a definite preference for 10 per cent alcohol by the end
of the experiment. BALB/c and A/3
mice tended to avoid alcohol at all concentrations. Thus, among these four
strains was one with high initial prefer 

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

ence for alcohol, another that developed preference as it became familiar
with alcohol, and two that remained
avoiders.

Crosses were made between the
alcohol-preferring C57BL mice and
three water-preferring strains, C3H/2,
A/2, and DBA/2 (McClearn and
Rodgers, 1961). All the F1 offspring
were intermediate to their parents in

2 preference scores. A set of Mendelian
a crosses between C57BL and A yielded
§ the following alcoho] preference ratios:
BA = 0.12; F1xA = 0.18; Fl = 0.31;
9 F2 = 0.23; FIxB = 0.35; and B = 0.61.
A Alcohol preference and the proportion
oO
= of CS7BL genes were strongly correlat< ed in the hybrids. McClearn and Nichols
— (1970) demonstrated that intraperito3 S neal injection of alcohol to CS7BL mice
§ decreased their alcohol intake in pro= portion to the size of the injection. They
= concluded that differential intake in
4= their subjects was not based on taste or
2 other features of ingestion, but on the
c physiological effects of alcohol.
2 Alcohol preference in the studies re— viewed up to this point was measured by
> giving subjects a choice between water
Oo
y and a single solution of ethanol, com3 monly 10 per cent. Fuller (1964) used a
< more complex method that simultane= ously provided six concentrations of 0.5,
A 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 per cent. Alcohol
scores were computed by a formula that
can be found in the original paper. Figure 1 shows the typical pattern of intake
in CS7BL/6 and DBA/2 mice. The relatively constant slope of the CS7BL curve
indicates that individuals consumed approximately equal volumes from the
four most concentrated solutions and
consumed little of the two least concentrated. The DBA/2 slope shows no consumption of the most concentrated solu
n

Genetics of Alcohol Consumption in Animals

213

tion, a low and relatively uniform
acceptance of alcohol concentrations of
8 per cent to 1 per cent, and a striking
preference for the lowest concentration.

The same six-solution procedure was
used for four inbred strains: DBA/2J,
C3HeB/J, A/J, and C57BL/6J, and the
six possible F1 crosses between them,
This design is known as a half-diallel experiment. The results are shown in Figure 2, DBA’s and their crosses con-.
sumed the least alcohol; C57BL’s and
their hybrids were at the other end of the
distribution; and C3HeB’s and A’s were
intermediate. An analysis of variance of
the consumption scores showed a highly
significant effect of strain, but none for
sex. Computation of the general and
specific combining effects in the hybrids
showed significance for both, but the

Multiple Choice Method
for Alcohol Preference

C57 BL/6
(1.93)

Corrected Cumulative Intake - Mi.

 

0

4 2 i 0.5
(16) (1.3) (LO) (0.7)

16 8
(2.2) (1.9)
Alcohol Concentration (Vol.a%) ond Score Values

Fic. 1.—Graphical representation of alcohol
scores for C5S7BL/6 and DBA/2 mice. (From
Fuller, 1964, J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 57, p. 86.
Copyright 1964 by the American Psychological
Association. Reprinted with the permission of the
publisher.)
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

214 Fuller

specific effects were higher (Table 1).
This means that, although hybrid scores
always fell between those of the parent
strains, the degree of dominance for alcohol consumption depended on the
specific cross.

It would be interesting to know
whether few or many genes are involved
in differences in alcohol consumption
among inbred strains of mice. Fuller and
Collins (1972) analyzed the outcome of
a standard Mendelian experiment using
C57BL/6 and DBA/2 mice with F1, F2,
and backcrosses. Figure 3 shows that a
two-factor model with partial dominance for high consumption is superior
to a one-factor model in explaining alcohol consumption in the F2 and backcross generations. This result suggests,
but does not prove, that only a few loci
are involved in the differential consumption of alcohol by these two

\ DBA/2xA | DBA/2u Ke

C57BL/6xC3HeB

50 LA | C57BL4 x0BA/2
0

Mean percentage fluid intake
from the six alcohol solutions

Social Biology

TABLE 1

GENERAL AND SPECIFIC COMBINING ABILITIES
FOR ALCOHOL SCORES OF HyBriD MICE

Source of Variation df MS F

General combining
effect .......... 3. 0.507 =: 10.042
Special combining
effect .......... 2 1.688 33.40
Within groups ..... 90 ~=0.051
Source: Adapted from Fuller, 1964, p. 87.
“9 < 0.01.

strains. By using recombinant inbred
Strains from C57BL/6 x DBA/2 crosses
it might be possible to assign the genes
regulating alcohol consumption to specific chromosomes.
There have been a number of heritability estimates of alcohol preference using inbred strains of mice. Whitney et al.

AxC3HeB

 

| C3HeB/U

 

507 CS7BL/6xA C57BL/6U
Groups ordered by rank onmean
preference score.

° Os 10 20 40 80 16.0

PERCENT ALCOHOL

Fic. 2.—Per cent of total fluid consumed from each of six concentrations of ethanol by four inbred
strains and their hybrids. (From Fuller, 1964, J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 57, p. 87. Copyright 1964 by the
American Psychological Association. Reprinted with the permission of the publisher.)
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

@ Observed

O Predicted - 2 Factor

@ Pradicted -| Factor

Mean Alcohol Consumed Ml.

 

P(D/2) 8 Ff 82 P2(B/6)

Fic, 3.—Observed scores for alcoho] preference compared with predicted one-factor and twofactor models. (From Fuller and Collins, 1972,
Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 197, p. 43. Copyright 1972
New York Academy of Sciences. Reprinted with
the permission of the publisher.)

(1970) used a standard set of Mendelian
crosses from C57BL/1Bi X JK/Bi, and
CS7BL/Crgl  DBA/2Crgl. For the first
set of crosses heritability was 0.15; for
the second, 0.35. The difference was attributed to the much greater gap between the preferences of C57BL and
DBA mice. Heritabilities are characteristics of specific populations in particular
environments. They are not constants
for particular traits such as alcohol consumption.

HOW DO GENES AFFECT
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION?

Heritable differences in alcohol consumption have been demonstrated in
rats and mice. These differences have either been established by selective breeding or discovered fortuitously among inbred strains that have been maintained
for other purposes. Demonstrating differences in alcohol consumption is only

Genetics of Alcohol Consumption in Animals 215

a first step. It is more important to investigate reasons for wide differences in
consumption between selected lines
such as Eriksson’s AA and ANA rats,
and between inbred mouse strains such
as C57BL/6 and DBA/2. Are responses
to the taste and odor of alcohol important? Are alcohol and its metabolic
products more toxic in some strains than
in others? Does environmental history
have effects on later alcohol consumption, perhaps depending on genotype?
Does alcohol produce euphoria in some
genotypes and depression in others? We
do not have all the answers, but progress
has been made.

DBA’s are well Known to have
weaker aldehyde-dehydrogenase activity than do alcohol-inhibibing CS7BL’s.
The result is that there is more acetaldehyde in a DBA than in a C57BL that has
inbibed the same amount of ethanol. A
strong case has been made that the
DBA’s low consumption of ethanol is a
result of conditioned taste aversion resulting from the toxicity of acetaldehyde. Based on this hypothesis Horowitz and Whitney (1975) predicted that
aversion to a highly preferred saccharin
solution could be produced in DBA’s by
pairing access to saccharin with an intraperitoneal injection of ethanol! that
would be converted to aldehyde and oxidized very slowly. They also predicted
that the same procedure would not induce aversion to saccharin in CS7BL’s
because they metabolize acetaldehyde
so rapidly that the intraperitoneal alcohol injection would generate too little
acetaldehyde to produce taste aversion.
As predicted, DBA’s (but not CS7BL’s)
developed an aversion to normally
highly preferred saccharin.

Olfactory and orosensory factors
play an important role in human alcohol
216

consumption. We do not ordinarily consume 10 per cent ethanol in water, but
choose from a variety of wines, beers,
distilled liquors, and mixed drinks. It is
reasonable to assume that taste and
odor are important factors in the human
consumption of these products. Thus, it
is of interest to learn if differences in response to flavor and odors are significant
factors in the variability of alcohol consumption among strains of animals.
S Nachman et al. (1971) compared the
Ceffects of removal of the olfactory bulbs
n alcohol consumption in low-preference BALB/c and high- preference
AC57BL mice. Alcohol aversion in
*BALB’s was eliminated, but there was
Sno effect on the alcohol intake of
coC57BL’s. BALB’s appear to reject alcoshol without prior experience. To test the
‘hypothesis that BALB’s might be more
Sresponsive than C57BL’s to sensory
stimuli of several origins, both strains
2were tested for conditioned avoidance
Sof alcohol, sucrose, and saccharin by
pairing drinking of these substances
with an injection of lithium chloride.
EBALB’ s readily learned to avoid all
three substances; C57BL’s learned to
avoid sucrose and saccharin, but not alco
cohol. The authors propose that, in
ECS7BL’s, postingestional factors, rather
Sthan taste or odor preference, play the
Amajor role in alcohol preference. In
BALB’s preabsorptive factors dominate. Results of this kind demonstrate
that a number of genetic factors are involved in the regulation of alcohol consumption.

Belknap et al. (1977) used another
approach to comparing postabsorptive
and preabsorptive explanations of strain
differences in alcohol intake. They investigated taste, odor, and mucosal irritation as preabsorptive factors. Under

Fuller

Social Biology

the heading of postabsorptive factors
they listed rate of ethanol metabolism,
neural sensitivity, nutritional value, and
caloric intake. CS7BL/6J and DBA/2J
mice were given choices, after moderate
fluid deprivation, between water and elther 2 per cent or 10 per cent ethanol.
Blood alcohol levels were measured 15
and 60 minutes after subjects were given
access to the alcohol solutions. In
DBA’s levels of blood alcohol were so
low that it was very unlikely that they
could have had an appreciable physiological effect. CS7BL’s had significantly
higher levels. When lithium injections
were paired with access to 2 percent ethanol or to 15 per cent sucrose, aversions
to both substances were readily induced
in DBA’s. C57BL’s learned to avoid sucrose, but continued to ingest 2 per cent
ethanol from distilled water. The authors concluded that the regulation of
ethanol intake is predominantly preabsorptive in DBA’s and postabsorptive in
CS7BL’s.

A quite different factor, social environment, has been claimed to affect alcohol consumption in the generally
alcohol-rejecting DBA strain. Randall
and Lester (1975a) housed weanling
DBA mice with adult C57BL’s for 7
weeks. Their alcohol consumption was
twice as great as that of controls housed
with DBA adults. Furthermore, weanling CS7BL’s housed with adult DBA’s
consumed less alcohol than did those
housed with adults of their own strain.
The evidence is rather meager, but it
raises the possibility that, even in mice,
social factors and early experience play
some part in affecting alcohol consumption. In another experiment Randall
and Lester (1975b) made reciprocal
ovum transfers between the same two
strains. In early maturity the ovum
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

transfer mice were provided with an
alcohol-water choice. Mice developing
from a cross-strain ovum transfer drank
more alcohol and less water than those
from intrastrain ovum transfers. The genetic and ontogenetic significance of
these results is not clear, and it would be
helpful to have confirmatory data.

CONSUMPTION AND
SENSITIVITY

It is of interest to learn if alcohol consumption is linked with an animal’s sensitivity to its soporific and sensory effects. Suitable subjects for such a study
are the mice selected by McClearn and
Kakihana (1981) for high and low sensitivity to alcohol as measured by the duration of loss of the righting reflex following intraperitoneal injection of a
standard dose of ethanol. The two lines
are designated as long sleep (LS) and
short sleep (SS). Church et al. (1979)
tested their alcohol preference by measuring over thirty days: a choice between water and a water solution of 3
per cent glucose and 0.16 per cent saccharin (GS); or a choice between water
and GS plus 4 per cent ethanol
(GS + E). In a second phase the mice
were given a three-way choice from water, GS, and GS + E. Female mice, like
Eriksson’s rats, had a higher alcohol intake than males. Under both conditions
more alcohol was consumed by SS (alcohol-insensitive) than by LS (alcoholsensitive) mice. Thus, selection for
“short sleep time” also resulted in a
higher preference for ethanol. It seems
that the genetic bases of differences in
ethanol consumption and in ethanol
sensitivity overlap to an unknown degree.

Genetics of Alcohol Consumption in Animals

217

THE ETHANOL INTAKE
CONTROL SYSTEM

The experiments described in the
preceding sections demonstrate that alcohol consumption in experimental animals is regulated differently in a variety
of strains and their hybrids. Nevertheless, all individuals regulate to some degree. McClearn (1972) proposed an ethanol intake control system (EICS) in
which a reference signal sets limits on
the intake controller (Fig. 4). As a consequence of alcohol ingestion,-an “‘imbibed signal’’ feeds back information on
the status of the organism. As the imbibed signal meets the reference signal
at a junction they are compared. Intake
ceases when the two signals are equal.
McClearn’s model assumes that individual mice and individual humans differ in
the setting of their reference signal, and
that these differences are an important
factor in their encounter with alcohol.

The accuracy of such an EICS has
been tested with the long-sleep (LS) and
short-sleep (SS) lines of mice selected by
McClearn and Kakihana (1981).
Twenty mice from each of the lines were
given free choice between GS and
GS + E, with E taking the values of 0, 2,
4, 8, or 16 parts of ethanol (w/v) (Fuller,
1980). The solutions were isocaloric so
that differences in consumption would
be based on factors other than the energy they provided. Each subject was
tested for 5 days with each of the five
choices in a balanced order. Between
test periods it received water for 2 days.
Positions of the GS and GS +E dispensers were changed after the third test
day. There was a striking decrease in
fluid intake during the 2-day rest intervals. When GS and GS+E were
present, the average daily consumption
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

218 Fuller Social Biology

Signal junction

 
   
   
 
    

Ethanol
in system

Imbibed
Signal

Fic. 4.—A schema for a closed loop feedback system for the regulation of alcohol intake. (From McClearn, 1972, in O. Forsander and K. Eriksson [eds.], Biological aspects of alcohol consumption, p. 114.
Copyright 1972 The Finnish Foundation for Alcohol Studies. Reprinted with the permission of the publisher.)

wwiOl

GSE/T =0.66~0.19'in®

GSE/T

an
SWVHD —I3XxVINI

 

0 2 4 8 16
%E

Fic. 5.—Upper line (T): Mean combined intake of GS and GSE at different concentrations of ethanol
in GSE. Lower line: Change in preference ratio (volume of GSE/T) at varying ethanol options. Note close
fit of data points to calculated regression line. (From Fuller, 1980, in K. Eriksson, J. D. Sinclair, and K.
Kiianmaa [eds.], Animal models in alcohol research, p. 58. Copyright 1980 Academic Press, Inc. Reprinted with the permission of the publisher.)

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

of both fluids combined (T) was
14.98 g., about 68 per cent of mean body
weight. The mean daily consumption of
water on weekends was 5.45 g., slightly
over 1/3 of the daily consumption of the
test solutions. Clearly, during the test
periods these mice ingested much more
fluid than was required for maintenance. GS and GS + E were consumed
for hedonic reasons as well as for physiological needs.

Figure 5 shows the values of T for
each of the five options. Total consumption values for the 0 and 2 per cent options were reliably higher than for the 4
per cent, 8 per cent, and 16 per cent options. The preference ratios (GSE
intake/Total intake) are also shown. Using a logarithmic scale there was a
straight-line decline in ethanol preference as its concentration increased. Differences in the precision of regulation of
consumption by sex and line are shown

 
 
   
 
  
 
   

$$ e--@® GSE=e 150-50 In-€

L$ O -O© GSE = 12.6-4.5 In’ E

GSE —gvday
wr

ww

Femaies

2 4 8 16
*E

Fic, 6.—Mean daily intake of GSE by SS and
LS females at four ethanol concentrations. Lines
were Calculated on the assumption of perfect regulation. (From Fuller, 1980, in K. Eriksson, J. D.
Sinclair, and K. Kiianmaa [eds.], Animal models
in alcohol research, p. 59. Copyright 1980 Academic Press, Inc. Reprinted with the permission of
the publisher.)

Genetics of Alcohol Consumption in Animals

 

219

in Figures 6 and 7. For females in both
lines alcohol consumption at four concentrations was very close to lines plotted on the assumption of perfect regulation. Consumption by males deviated
significantly from idealized perfect regulation when higher concentrations of
ethanol (8 per cent and 16 per cent)
were provided. Both LS and SS mice
regulated ethanol intake reasonably
well. McClearn’s model worked under
the conditions of this experiment. Figure 8 shows daily changes in ethanol intake for the samples as a whole during
the 5-day exposures to each of the four
alcohol concentrations. If regulation of
intake at a particular concentration of
ethanol was achieved immediately, the
slope of its graph would be zero. The
figure demonstrates that this result was
obtained with the more dilute concentrations (2 per cent and 4 per cent) by
the second test day. With 8 per cent and

 

10.0
$S @-——® GSE=8.2 ~ 2.3 IinwE
6.0
3.0
~
2
vv
na
t
ay
"
o
1.0
0.5
*E

Fic. 7.—Mean daily intake of GSE by SS and
LS males. Lines were calculated on the assumption
of perfect regulation. (From Fuller, 1980, in K.
Eriksson, J. D. Sinclair, and K. Kiianmaa [eds.]},
Animal models in alcohol research, p. 60. Copyright Academic Press, Inc. Reprinted with the permission of the publisher.)
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

220

NO

>97kg

-day ethanol intake

Percent of 5

Fuller

Social Biology

 

3 4  §

Days

Fic. 8.—Per cent of total ethanol ingested (%J) during each day (D) of a 5-day test with ethanol concentrations of 2, 4, 8, and 16 parts per 100. The regression line for each concentration is identified by a
numeral, and was calculated from the formula, %/ = a + bD. (From Fuller, 1980, in K. Eriksson, J. D.
Sinclair, and K. Kiianmaa [eds.], Animal models in alcoho! research, p. 61. Copyright 1980 Academic
Press, Inc. Reprinted with the permission of the publisher.)

16 per cent ethanol there was a significant tendency in both lines to increase
alcohol intake over the 5 test days. That
regulation of consumption should be
less effective with greater differences
between the inputs is counter-intuitive.
More research on the dynamics of EICS
is needed.

SUMMARY

Selection for alcohol consumption in
rats 1s highly effective. Inbred strains of

mice vary greatly in consumption of alcohol when given a choice of fluids.
Mice selected for high or low sensitivity
to alcohol also differ in alcohol consumption and regulation of intake. The
heritability of alcohol consumption patterns has been calculated by parentoffspring correlations and crosses
among inbred strains. The results of
such computations are dependent on
the populations tested and the methods
employed. Strains of mice differ in the
relative importance of preabsorptive

 
Vol. 32, No. 3-4

and postabortive factors in affecting alcohol consumption. It seems likely that
the distinctions between preabsorptive
and postabsorptive factors found in animals apply also to humans. Those of us
who work with animal models believe
that there are common features in rodent and human encounters with alco
Genetics of Alcohol Consumption in Animals

221

hol. The variations in alcohol consumption found in inbred strains and selected
lines of experimental animals often
seem to mirror individual. differences in
Our own species. Research on the concept of an EICS in both animals and humans will be needed as we cope with the
problem of alcoholism.

REFERENCES

4
SANDERSON, S. M., and G. E. McCLeEarn. 1981.
‘\ Ethanol consumption: Selective breeding in
© mice. Behav. Genet. 11:291-301.
ELKNAP, J. K., N. D. Becxnap, J. H. Bera,

2 andR. CoLEMAN. 1977. Preabsorptive vs.
A postabsorptive control of ethanol intake in
x ©57BL/6J and DBA/2J mice. Behav.
© Genet. 7:413-425.
SCuurcu, A.C., J. L. Fucer, and L. Dann.
1979. Alcohol intake in selected lines of
mice: Importance of sex and genotype. J.
Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 93:242-246.
"SERIKKSON, K. 1969a. Factors affecting voluntary alcohol consumption in the albino rat.
Ann. Zool. Fenn. 6:227-265.
1969b. The estimation of heritability
for the selection of alcohol in the albino rat.
Ann. Med. Exper. Biol. Fenn. 47:172-174.
p>———. 1971. Rat strains specially selected for
“ their voluntary alcoho! consumption. Ann.
2 Med. Exper. Biol. Fenn. 49:67-72.
‘=Frost, R. 1930. The cow in apple time. In Col~ lected poems of Robert Frost. Henry Holt,
2 New York.

FuLLeR, J. L. 1964. Measurement of alcohol

at 13:4

chiga

cle

O

 

S preference in genetic experiments. J.
3 Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 57:85-88.

S . 1980. Regulation of alcohol intake in
5 long- and short-sleep mice, p. 57-62. In K.
A Eriksson, J. D. Sinclair and K. Kiianmaa

(eds.), Animal models in alcohol research.
Academic Press, New York.

FuLier, J. L., and R. L. Coiiins. 1972. Ethanol consumption and preference in mice: A
genetic analysis. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci.
197:42—48.

Horowitz, G.P., and G. WHITNEY. 1975.
Alcchol-induced conditioned aversion:
Genotypic specificity in mice (Mus musculus) J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 89:340-346.

McCLearn, G.E. 1972. The genetics of alcohol preference, p. 113-119. Jn O. Forsander
and K. Eriksson (eds.), Biological aspects
of alcohol consumption (International Symposium on Biological Aspects of Alcohol

 

Consumption, Helsinki, September 1971).
The Finnish Foundation for Alcohol Studies
(Vol. 20), Helsinki.

McC earn, G.E., and R. KakiHANa. 1981.
Selective breeding for ethanol sensitivity:
Short-sleep and long-sleep mice, p. 147159. In G.E. McClearn, R. A. Deitrich,
and V.G. Erwin (eds.), Development of
animal models as pharmacogenetic tools
(DHHS Publication No. (ADM) 81-1133).
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

McCLeEarn, G.E., and D, Nicuots. 1970. Effects of intraperitoneal injection of ethanol
on ethanol ingestion of C57BL mice. Psychonom. Sci. 20:55-56.

McCLearn, G.E., and D. A. Ropcers. 1959.
Differences in alcohol preference among inbred strains of mice. Quart. J. Stud. Alc.
20:691~695.

. 1961. Genetic factors in alcohol preference of laboratory mice. J. Comp. Physiol.
Psychol. 54:116-119.

NACHMAN, M., C. LARUE, and J. LEMAGNON.
1971. The role of olfactory and orosensory
factors in the alcohol preference of inbred
strains of mice. Physiol. Behav. 6:53-59.

RANDALL, C. L., and D. Lester. 1975a. Social
modification of alcohol consumption in inbred mice. Science 189:149-151.

. 1975b. Alcohol selection by DBA and
C57 mice arising from ova transfers. Nature
255:147~-148.

Ropcers, D. A., and G. E. McCLearn, 1962.
Mouse strain differences in preference for
various concentrations of alcohol. Quart. J.
Stud. Alc. 23:26-33.

SIEGEL, R. K. 1979, Natural animal addictions:
and ethological perspective, p. 29-60. In
J.D. Keehn (ed.), Psychopathology in animals. Academic Press, New York.

WHITNEY, G., G. E. MCCLEarn, and J. C. DEFries. 1970. Heritability of alcohol preference in laboratory mice and rats. J. Hered.
81:165-169.

 

 
