Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Book notes

Thomas J. Bouchard Jr. & Michael Andregg

To cite this article: Thomas J. Bouchard Jr. & Michael Andregg (1977) Book notes, Social
Biology, 24:4, 342-344, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1977.9988309

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1977.9988309

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

342

practices (KAP) of birth control across
samples. The strongest effect of education
upon all factors affecting family size occurred when mothers had at least some
secondary education. The more obviously
biological effects (e.g., rates of stillbirth,
time interval to next birth lengthened by
breast feeding) demonstrate the universality of human physical nature, while the
observed cultural and educational influences underline our diversity as a species.

The work is of value for all persons
interested in human biology. Its successor
volume will further broaden our knowledge of human reproduction.

JEROME WALLER

Department of Biostatistics
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, Pa.

BOOK NOTES

HUMAN EVOLUTION: AN INTRODUCTION
TO BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY: By C.
L. Brace and Ashley Montagu. Second
edition. Macmillan Publishing Co.,
New York, 1977. 493 pp. $12.95 (hardbound).

The first section of this three-part text
introduces the student to the history of
evolutionary thought, develops the elementary principles of Mendelian genetics
and population genetics, and includes a
brief chapter on primate behavior. The
second section, by far the longest, deals
with fossil man. The approach is heavily
historical, and the tremendous conceptual
problems faced by workers in this field are
faced directly. Part Three deals with the
concept of race and the significance of contemporary human variation.

Book Reviews

Social Biology

HuMAN BIOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION
TO HUMAN EVOLUTION, VARIATION,
GROWTH, AND Eco.ocy. Edited by-G.
A. Harrison, J. S. Weiner, J. M. Tanner, and N. A. Barnicot. Second edition. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
1977.

A superior text by four pioneers of
human biology. Part I deals with human
evolution (primates through human society). Part II deals with human genetics
(from Mendel through gene action through
population genetics). Part III deals with
the major forms of biological variation in
modern populations (race, body size,
shape, and color, biochemical variants,
blood groups, etc.). Part IV deals with
growth and physique. Part V deals with
human ecology (nutrition, climate, disease, population stability). Each part includes a list of suggestions for further readings. The book is organized into twentysix generally brief and tightly organized
chapters. This organization makes assignments easy and allows the student to
deal with them efficiently. The writing is
clear and succinct. References are as late
as 1976.

HuMAN DIVERSITY: ITS CAUSES AND SoCIAL SIGNIFICANCE: Edited by B. D.
Davis and Patricia Flaherty. Ballinger Publishing Co., Cambridge, Mass.,
1976. 248 pp. $15.00 (hardbound).

This book is a summary of formal presentations and discussions by 35 scholars
who participated in four two-day seminars
(winter, 1973—spring, 1974) sponsored by
the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Seminar I dealt with evolution;
Seminar II, with genetics; Seminar III,
with behavior genetics; and Seminar IV,
with intelligence and group differences.
The diversity of opinion, particularly with
respect to the issues discussed in the last
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 24, No. 4

two sections, was very great; and as one
would expect, no consensus was reached.
The book would make a poor introduction
to the topics discussed, but would be of
interest to individuals with a working
knowledge of the domains. Cronbach’s
discussion of IQ tests is especially articulate and informative. Unfortunately, the
participants never did get to the issue of
the social significance of human biological
and behavioral diversity.

HUMAN GENETICS: By Edward Novitski.
Macmillan, New York, 1977. 458 pp.

An introductory text which minimizes
the need for mathematical skills and an
understanding of basic chemistry. The
approach is nonhistorical, and the author
attempts to relate scientific knowledge to
biological-social problems. For example,
there are chapters on the nuclear energy controversy, carcinogenesis-teratogenesis-mutagenesis, behavior and _ intelligence, genetic counseling, and the manipulation of man’s genetic system.

HEREDITY AND SOCIETY: READINGS IN
SOCIAL GENETICS: Edited by A. S.
Baer. Second edition. Macmillan, New
York. 1977. 460 pp. $7.95 (paper).

This is a broad-gauged reader designed
for courses dealing with genetic aspects of
contemporary social problems. Forty-five
papers are reprinted, covering nine major
areas: social structure, agriculture, environmental hazards, behavior, aging,
population problems, medical genetics
and counseling, evolution-race-intelligence, and gene therapy and the future.
Each major section is prefaced by an
overview of the issues and a selected bibliography. It is a very readable volume,
emphasizing ideas rather than method or
sheer facts.

Book Reviews

343

RACE AND RaAceEs: By Richard A.
Goldsby. Second edition. Macmillan,
New York, 1977. 158 pp. $5.50 (paper).

This primer on race discusses at a nontechnical level the biological meaning of
race, races, human diversity, evolution,
the origin of races, and race and mental
ability. The first edition of this book was
written in response to the furor created by
Arthur Jensen’s work on mental ability.
The Nichols and Anderson paper (Social
Biology, 1973, Vol. 20, pp. 367-374) is
cited as evidence that matching on social
class dramatically reduces the IQ difference between Blacks and whites, without
mention of the problem of the matching
fallacy so carefully described by those authors. Nevertheless, the book on the whole
is well balanced, well written, and worth
looking at if you teach a course that needs
a brief supplementary text on race.

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH DESIGN AND
SOCIAL MEASUREMENT: By D. C. Miller. Third edition. David McKay Co.,
New York, 1977. 518 pp. $7.95 (paper).

Aimed at the advanced graduate student and researcher in sociology, this book
is nevertheless a gold mine of information
for researchers who are interested in sociological methods but whose primary training is in another area. The book is divided
into five parts: (1) general guides to research design and sampling; (2) guides to
data collection techniques, and to data already collected (social science archives); (3)
guide to statistical analysis; (4) a very
broad and useful selection of sociometric
scales and indexes; and (5) a discussion of
research funding, costs and reporting, including a guide to the major sociological,
psychological, political science, public
administration, anthropological, educational, and organizational journals. It is
an extremely useful book for any social
science researcher.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

344

PATTERNS OF SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION: By A. S. Parks. Oxford University Press, New York and Oxford,
1976. 148 pp. $7.25 (hardbound); $3.75

(paper).

A brief little book designed for the
nonspecialist biologist and educated
layman on the topic of reproductive biology. I suspect it will prove useful in highschool and college courses in human sexuality. It is well written and authoritative,
with numerous very informative and easily interpreted charts and graphs. The
nine chapters cover: the reproductive
life cycle; variations such as puberty,
menarche, menstruation; seasonal effects;
environmental effects; multiple births; the
sex ratio; the social impacts of reproduction; sexuality; and social factors influencing reproduction.

THOMAS J. BOUCHARD, JR.

Department of Psychology
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, Minnesota

METHODOLOGY IN MEDICAL GENETICS:
AN INTRODUCTION TO STATISTICAL
METHODs: By E. H. Emery. Churchill
Livingstone, Edinburgh, London, and
New York. 1976. 157 pp. $14.95 (hardbound).

An outstanding practical guide to
elementary statistical methods used in the
study of medical genetics, its virtue lies in
its clear and very concise descriptions of

Book Reviews

Social Biology

computational methods. The emphasis is
entirely on practical application. Topics
range from populational measures such as
mutation rates, heritability, and detection
of disease associations through segregation
analysis, estimation of linkage, and estimation of recurrence risks for genetic
counseling. The book is well referenced
for those who wish more detailed consideration of particular questions. Nevertheless, examples are provided throughout,
along with essential tables, so that reference to other works would be unnecessary
for the solution of many problems of interest to students of medical genetics.

GENETIC COUNSELLING: By A. Stevenson, D. Davison, and M. Oakes. Second
edition. J. B. Lippincott Co., Philadelphia, 1976. 357 pp. $15.00 (hardbound).

The first third of this guide for genetic
counselling is devoted to chapters on
elementary genetics and methods for the
derivation of risk estimates. Following
this section are concise clinical descriptions of a wide variety of inherited disorders. Included is the mode of transmission, if simple, or empirical risk estimates
if causation is multifactorial. The book’s
utility is enhanced by its systemic organization of inherited disorders.

MICHAEL ANDREGG

Dight Institute of Human Genetics
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, Minnesota

 
