Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Book notes

To cite this article: (1992) Book notes, Social Biology, 39:3-4, 320-324, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1992.9988829

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1992.9988829

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

%
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lil Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:45
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

Book Notes

EVOLUTIONARY ECOLOGY AND HUMAN
BEHAVIOR: Edited by Eric Alden
Smith and Bruce Winterhalder.
Foundations of Human Behavior
Series, Aldine de Gruyter, Hawthorne, New York, 1992. 470 pages.
$59.95, hardbound; $29.95, paperback.

In this collection of original, commissioned articles by leading authorities, the editors present anthropological applications of evolutionary
ecology in a single, systematic booklength treatment. Unified by a common theoretical framework and a consistency of scope, the contributors
cover such diverse topics as: primate
social structure; hominid evolution;
food acquisition strategies; time allocation; habitat use; collective action;
competition; reproductive strategies;
and population dynamics. This volume
is a valuable reference tool for social
and behavioral scientists, anthropologists, zoologists, ecologists, and socio
biologists and will serve as a primary

text in graduate and advanced undergraduate classes.

Eric Alden Smith is Associate Professor of Anthropology, University of
Washington. He has conducted fieldwork on subsistence ecology and economics among Hudson Bay Inuit and
is currently analyzing demographic
data collected in the same area. Bruce
Winterhalder is Professor and Chairman, Department of Anthropology,
and a member of the Ecology Curriculum, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill. He has carried out fieldwork on various evolutionary ecology

 

 

topics among the Cree of northern Ontario and the Quechua of highland
Peru.

TOWARD A UNIFIED EcoLoGy: By
T.F.H. Allen and Thomas W.
Hoekstra. Complexity in Ecological
Systems Series, Columbia University Press, New York, 1992. 384
pages. $52, hardbound.

Two key demands are being made
of ecology: that the discipline increasingly be a predictive one; and that ecologists be prepared to consider largescale systems. These systems become
simple or complex based on the level
and type of explanation required, and
a strict and consistent epistemology is
needed in light of new insights into the
nature of complexity. T.F.H. Allen
and Thomas W. Hoekstra argue that
complex systems analysis requires
ecologists to distinguish models and to
recognize that models must invoke a
scale and point of view. Toward a Unified Ecology offers a strategy to attain
a unity that brings basic ecology to bear
on ecological management.

Beginning with hierarchy theory as
a basic premise, the book goes on to
explain that the conventional “levels”
—ecosystems, landscapes, communities, populations, organisms—are not
levels in themselves but criteria for observation. The authors assert that the
essential character of ecology’s subdisciplines is scale-dependent. Putting
scale back into systems of well-defined
type captures the richness of the connections in the material ecological system. Allen and Hoekstra present a

320
Vol. 39, No. 3-4

conceptual framework for a more coherent view of ecology, showing how
to link the various parts of ecology into
a natural whole.

This monograph, a part of Complexity in Ecological Systems series, emphasizes what ecologists do and why
they do it, as well as specific research
strategies. This volume is as much

wabout the general properties of life as it
Sis about ecological systems narrowly
sdefined. Toward a Unified Ecology is
for practicing and aspiring research
secologists and population biologists, as
Awell as those in the management of
Swildlife and forests.

~ T.F.H. Allen is Professor Botany
“at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. Thomas W. Hoekstra is Asst. Di‘srector for Research, Rocky Mountain
-=Forest and Range Experiment Station
of the U.S.D.A. Forest Service, Fort
Collins, Colorado.

f

YSTEMATICS, ECOLOGY, AND THE BiIoDIVERSITY Crisis: Edited by Niles Eldredge. Columbia University Press,
New York, 1992. 220 pages. $40,
hardbound.

nloaded by [University O

Which species can be saved, when

Ball cannot? Systematics, Ecology, and

Athe Biodiversity Crisis provides critical
tools for finding answers. Systematists
are in a unique position to identify critical areas of endemism and additional
criteria for the identification of habitats
and species most urgently in need of
protection.

The result of a symposium held at
the American Museum of Natural History, this book fills a void created by
other volumes that have explored the
biodiversity crisis exclusively from an
ecological stance. “It may well be that

Book Notes

321

the dynamics of extinction processes
will prove to be exclusively in the domain of moment-by-moment interactive processes of matter-energy transfer: the realm of ecology. But the
problems of extinction,” Eldredge argues, “can be defined, recognized,
measured, and assessed only through
the tools of the systematist.”’

Included are noted systematists, paleontologists, and ecologists who explore the relationship between ecology
and systematics as it pertains to understanding the origin, maintenance, and
loss of biological diversity. The role of
museums, zoos, and related institutions is also examined.

Niles Eldredge is a Curator in
the Department of Invertebrates, the
American Museum of Natural History,
New York.

EXTINCTION AND PHYLOGENY: Edited
by Michael J. Novacek and Quentin
D. Wheeler. Columbia University
Press, New York, 1992. 253 pages.
$50, hardbound.

More than 99 per cent of all life that
has ever existed on this planet is extinct. Moreover, human acceleration
of the extinction of species has created
a crisis in biodiversity. How can the
history of past life be retrieved? How
does this history bear on our understanding of the organization and evolution of present-day species?

This book offers new and original
research by leading authorities on
evolutionary and systematic biology,
investigators in botany, zoology, and
paleontology. This book includes
chapters about the recovery of information from living biota, taking into
account the limitations of sampling and
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

322

the steady rate of contemporary extinction of taxa. Complementary discussions elucidate problems involving
the analysis of data sets of variable
completeness—for example, partially
preserved fossils or patchy samples of
extant taxa.

Extinction and Phylogeny balances
empirical issues with the theoretical
and applies cladistic methodology.
This detailed text will prove valuable
for professional and student biologists
alike and for those in related disciplines. The relationship between extinction and phylogenetic theory must
be understood if we are to explain existing biological diversity and effectively assess the declining biodiversity
of our planet in the decades to come.

Michael J. Novacek is Vice President, Dean of Science, and Curator,
Department of Vertebrate Paleontology, American Museum of Natural
History, and Adjunct Professor of Biology, City University of New York.
Quentin D. Wheeler is Associate Professor of Insect Systematics and Chairman of the Department of Entomology
at Cornell University and Research
Associate in the Department of Entomology, American Museum of Natural
History.

THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE HistToriEs: By
Stephen C. Stearns. Oxford University Press, New York, 1992. 249
pages. $29.95, paperback.

This book introduces life history evolution to postgraduate students beginning their research in population biology, ecology, or evolutionary biology.
It discusses major analytical tools,
gives examples of their applications,
and provides problems for discussion

Book Notes

 

Social Biology

at the end of each chapter. It will interest all biologists wishing to understand the evolution of the life cycle and
the causes of phenotypic variation in
fitness, and it contains the seeds of applications of life history theory to population dynamics, behavior, and community ecology.

Part I builds up the tools needed
for a well-grounded evolutionary explanation: demography, quantitative
genetics, reaction norms, trade-offs,
and phylogenetic/comparative analysis. Part II discusses the evolution of
major life history traits.

Steven C. Stearns is with the Zoology Institute, University of Basle,
Switzerland.

MOTHER AND FETUS. CHANGING NoTIONS OF MATERNAL RESPONSIBILITY:
By Robert H. Blank. Contributions
in Medical Studies, No. 36, Greenwood Press, Westport, CT. 244
pages. $45, hardbound.

This book covers the legal and social
issues raised both by emerging technologies for fetal intervention and increasing knowledge of fetal development.

The work opens with a framework
for examining rights and, in Chapter 2,
gives an in-depth description of knowledge about the impact of maternal actions on fetal development. Attention
then turns to current trends in case law,
as Chapter 3 traces the growing acceptance of causes of legal action for prenatal injury or death of the fetus.
Chapter 4 extends this analysis to look
at the changing legal context for defining standards of care for pregnant
women. Chapter 5 examines three disparate but critical topics illustrating the
pressures women face in the 1990s:
Vol. 39, No. 3-4

workplace hazards, teenage pregnancy, and surrogate motherhood.
The final chapter integrates the technological, legal, social, and political dimensions surrounding the maternalfetal relationship into a context for
creating an effective public policy.

Robert H. Blank is Professor of Political Science and Associate Director
vof the Program for Biosocial Research
cat Northern Illinois University.

ber 2

THE Kaspar HAUSER SYNDROME OF
‘“PSYCHOSOCIAL DwarFIsM.”’ DEFICIENT STATURAL, INTELLECTUAL AND
SociAL GROWTH INDUCED BY CHILD
ABUSE: By John Money. Prometheus Books, Buffalo, New York,
1992. 290 pages. $24.95, hardbound.

ichigan] at 13:45 08 Dec

Information on the physical, social,
Zand mental effects of child abuse and
‘heglect is gathered in this extraordipiary study. John Money adopts the hisSorical figure of Kaspar Hauser as the
®aradigm case of abusive neglect and
“deprivation that have typified reports
a .
“of child abuse for more than a century.
2 Hauser was a physically stunted
&dult with the mind of a child, who was
Abandoned at the city gate of NuremAurg in 1828, after seventeen years of
neglect and isolation in a dungeon. The
notoriety of his case gave the impetus
to many learned arguments regarding
the significance of nature versus nurture. Money summarizes the various
incorrect theories that have been advanced. He cites recent studies showing that deprivation drastically impairs
the normal functioning of growth hormones, thus causing physical dwarfism,
mental retardation, and defective social development. He shows how chil
Book Notes

323

dren from abusive environments can
be effectively treated by a move to a
new home and affectionate stimulation
of the skin senses. Data collected on
more than thirty modern cases of the
Kaspar Hauser syndrome are presented to support Money’s arguments.

The work concludes with a review
by Joshua Kendall of the Kaspar
Hauser figure in nineteenth- and
twentieth-century poetry, prose, and
drama.

John Money, M.D., is professor of
medical psychology and professor of
pediatrics, emeritus, at the Johns Hopkins University Hospital, and founder
of the Psychohormonal Research Unit.

GENETICS, EtHics, AND HUMAN VALUES. HUMAN GENOME MappPinG, GENETIC SCREENING AND GENE THERApy: Edited by Z. Bankowski and
A.M. Capron. Proceedings of the
XXIVth CIOMS Round Table Conference, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 1991.
200 pages. $18, paperback.

This book explores the unique ethical issues raised by spectacular recent
advances in molecular genetics. Predicting that researchers will, perhaps
within a decade, identify every gene
capable of harming human health,
the book takes a future-oriented approach, concentrating on the need to
anticipate ethical dilemmas and develop guidelines at both the clinical
and research levels.

The main part of the book, which is
divided into three parts, records 15
conference papers presented by experts in ethics, health policy, and law
as well as by investigators working
at the frontline of research in human
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

324 Book Notes

genetics. Papers in the first part, devoted to human genome mapping, review current mapping projects in the
USA and Japan, predict the most
likely clinical gains, and discuss the
novel ethical problems created by
these gains. Implications for public
policy are considered in terms of the
costs of the projects, competition for
funds, disclosure of test results, and
state interests in protection of the ‘“‘human gene pool.”

Genetic screening forms the focus
for the second group of papers, which
report experiences in screening and
counselling programs for f-thalassemia, Huntington’s disease, and familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy,
and point to the need for an international code of ethics in medical genetics before the human genome is
mapped. Details range from a list of
eight ethical problems faced by both

Social Biology

geneticists and their patients to advice
on the recommended number and
length of counselling sessions that
should be held.

The final group of papers considers
the new ethical and policy issues raised
by the development of therapies capable of correcting the mutant gene and
thus offering truly curative treatment
for the hundreds of major, lethal genetic diseases. Adenosine deaminase
deficiency and Gaucher’s disease are
used as models for discussing ethical
and policy implications.

The book also includes an eightpoint declaration, adopted by 100 participants from 25 countries, which sets
out the ethical principles that should
guide: human genome mapping, genetic screening and counselling, and
modification of human somatic and
germ cells for therapeutic or preventive purposes.

 
