Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Discussion: Race and demographic analysis

G. Franklin Edwards

To cite this article: G. Franklin Edwards (1971) Discussion: Race and demographic analysis,
Social Biology, 18:4, 394-396, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1971.9987947

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1971.9987947

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB arr | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
alil Article views: 1
N
Q View related articles 4

wa Citing articles: 1 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:32

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Discussion: Race and Demographic Analysis

G. Franklin Edwards

Department of Sociology and Anthropology
Howard University
Washington, D.C.

The title of Professor Bogue’s paper suggests that there are ways of omitting race
in demographic analysis. However, there is
a logical antecedent to this prescription,
namely, that it is highly desirable that the
category be omitted. In referring to the
inclusion of race on record forms, particularly those of the census bureau, the
charge is made that demographers contribute to the inherent evil of racism by
helping to focus on race and, through their
analyses, on racial differences. While demographers as social scientists may not be
guilty of racism, they provide, through
their data collection and analysis, material
for people whose motives are not altruistic.

In one way or another, either directly or
indirectly, the paper raises most of the
arguments which have been directed against
the inclusion of race on record forms for
more than a decade, including the notion
that the concept is vague, unreliable, and
meaningless.

The basic weakness of Professor Bogue’s
argument, it seems to me, is that the problems of race are real and meaningful ones,
and the omission of race as a category on
record forms, by which racial comparisons
are precluded, does not dismiss the reality
of existing differentials. The results of analysis by race are not always invidious.

 

Multiple standardizations, employing race,
occupation, education, and income for
many phenomena, provide the knowledge
that there is a remarkable similarity in the
behavior of blacks and whites. In other
instances, such a procedure informs us of
the differences between blacks and whites
and often provides data for sound inferences of discriminatory behavior.

On balance, it would appear that minorities stand to lose if race, religion, and
national origin are not included on record
forms. This is, indeed, the lesson which
some minority group leaders have come to
learn. In the early 1960’s many black
leaders, responding to the wave of integration sentiment and fearing the misuse of
data which showed high rates of black illegitimacy, functional illiteracy, venereal
disease, family separations, and other phenomena, argued that the race item should
be omitted from demographic records. A
decade later the position of these leaders
has changed, largely as a result of the need
for data which can be tabulated by race.

There is, in the first instance, the need
for data which provide baselines for the
evaluation of change and for monitoring
government programs designed to eliminate
racial inequalities. The pace at which schoo!
desegregation is occurring is a case in point.

394.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 18, No. 4 Discussion: Race and Demographic Analysis

In the area of employment, it is clear that
the implementation of the Philadelphia
Plan and other programs designed to provide minorities with an equitable share of
jobs requires that reliable demographic
data by race be available and updated
periodically. The need is not only for good
data for various geographic units as collected by our national censuses, but for
local censuses and estimates which make
data available by race and occupational
skill.

Finally, in this connection, it is evident
that minorities, as they become more politically conscious, are deeply concerned
about the inclusion of race on documents
for two major reasons. They want to be
certain that they are fully counted, so that
the areas in which they live may receive
their proportionate share of federal grants
to local areas for education, housing,
health care, and the like. Secondly, they
are deeply concerned that reliable counts
by race be made in order that they may
have fair representation, not only in the
National Congress but in state legislatures
and local councils as well. The mobilization
of political power and the election of black
politicians depend in large part upon a
knowledge of the number and distribution
of potential black voters.

The experience of the National Urban
League may be used to illustrate the shifting position of minorities regarding the
need for race on documents. In the early
Sixties, the League was opposed to the
inclusion of the race item, but by the late
1960’s, concerned with the effects of the
10% undercount of blacks in the 1960
decennial census on the welfare of the
black community, the League mounted a
campaign to help reduce the magnitude of
the undercount in the 1970 census. In February, 1970, it played a leading role in the
formation of the Coalition for a Black
Count, which was composed of 13 national

395

civil rights organizations. This effort was
financed at a cost of $250,000 because the
Coalition was convinced that the ‘next
decade of social planning would depend in
large measure on the outcome of the 1970
census.” As a part of its educational program, the Coalition published a little leaflet which was captioned, “Make Black
Count—Where it Counts—Get in the 1970
Census.” Among other appeals of the
pamphlet was the following:
You know the story, lay it on your black
brothers and sisters. Let them know that if
they don’t do their bit to make Black add up
in the Census, they’re stealing from every
Black in America. They’re stealing jobs,
housing, schools, hospitals, food. Let them

know every Black man, woman and child is
counting on them.

Professor Bogue’s appeal for the elimination of race on documents does not properly
assess the shift in the significance which
minorities attach to the item. There is
today not only a desire for inclusion of the
item for its perceived utilitarian value, but
there also is far less sensitivity to possible
misinterpretations of racial differentials.
Whether defensive or not, the differentials
in black-white comparisons today are attributed to a racist society and are not embarrassing for this reason. The former
sensitive reactions resulted from the attributions that blacks were inferior, incompetent, or immoral, depending upon whether
the differential referred to health status,
intellectual capacity, crime, or sexual behavior. It should be observed also that as a
part of the general social movement or
Negro Revolution, there is a sense of black
identity which heretofore was not present
in Negro life, so that resistance to identification as Black Americans, for census and
other purposes, is not so great as in other
periods.

It remains to be said that it is difficult
to accept Professor Bogue’s argument that
the census bureau should spend more of its
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

396

energies and resources in gathering mass
data on income, occupation, multigenerational households, associational membership, and a number of other items rather
than on race. While each of these items
may have significance for particular problems, no one of them has a more universalistic significance than race.

Beyond this, the alternatives posed by
Professor Bogue for gathering data by race,
if the item is eliminated from the census,
are neither highly feasible nor acceptable
from a research viewpoint. Social scientists
should be able, he asserts, to locate members of racial groups through group processes—membership lists, publishing lists,
lead-me-to-a-neighbor interviewing techniques, and the like. The paper asserts,
however, that such alternatives may be

Edwards

Social Biology

costly but can provide figures accurate
enough for small-scale studies. Demographers are concerned with the behavior of
total populations as well as with population subgroups, and mass data are needed.
The demands for demographic analysis by
race cannot be met efficiently by the techniques proposed. If, indeed, as the author
asserts, the analysis of mass data by race
does not provide explanations, partly because the category is not meaningful and
also because of the absence of interactive
processes, it is only necessary to observe
that demographic analyses provide the
basis for meaningful interpretation of
trends and interrelationships among variables in some instances, and, in other
instances, the necessary insights for additional research of a different nature.

 
