Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Book notes

Kenneth A. Bennett

To cite this article: Kenneth A. Bennett (1976) Book notes, Social Biology, 23:3, 271-273, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1976.9988241

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988241

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:36
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Book Notes

DEMOGRAPHIC GENETICS: Edited by
Kenneth M. Weiss and Paul A. Ballonoff. Benchmark Papers in Genetics,
Vol. 3, Dowden, Hutchinson and Ross,
Inc., Stroudsburg, Pa., 1975. 414 pp.
$24.00 (hardbound).

Twenty-four papers, ranging from the
middle and late 1800’s to 1972, are duplicated from the originals and arranged
within the following three parts: (a) Early
Developments, (6) Adding Genetics to
Demographic Concepts, and (c) Dispersal
and Population Distribution. Many of the
papers are now considered classics in population genetics and were written by such
scientists as Darwin, Fisher, Haldane,
Wright, and Wahlund. Others are more
recent and reflect modern theoretical concepts of the relationships between population genetics and demography.

THE NEUROSCIENCES: PATHS OF DiSsCOVERY: Edited by Frederic G. Worden, Judith P. Swazey, and George
Adelman. The MIT Press, Cambridge,
1975. 622 pp. $14.95 (paper).

The many investigatory paths that
neuroscientists have used to explore the
mechanisms and functions of the brain are
sketched in this collection of thirty-one articles. This is not a reference book; rather,
its primary focus is on how scientific discovery and understanding occur through
the interaction of humans with other humans, with ideas, with technological developments. Hence some articles are historical, others anecdotal, and yet others
technical.

 

TEXTBOOK OF HUMAN GENETICS: Edited
by George Fraser and Oliver Mayo.
Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, 1975. 524 pp. $27.00 (paper).

Each of the ten chapters in this textbook
is written by a different author. Although
it begins oddly (after an Introduction) with
Fundamental and Population Genetics,
the remaining chapters follow in a more
standard sequence: Chemical Basis of Inheritance; Biochemical Variation; Developmental Genetics; Cytogenetics; Somatic
Cell Genetics; Immunogenetics; Quantitative Inheritance; and Disease and
Human Genetics. The book ts quite upto-date and is designed for advanced undergraduates, graduate students, and
postgraduates in medicine, biology,
human biology, and genetics.

GERIATRIC CARE IN ADVANCED SOCIETIES: Edited by J. C. Brocklehurst.
University Park Press, Baltimore, 1975.
160 pp. $24.50 (hardbound).

Six physicians have each contributed an
article concerning the development and
present state of geriatric care in their respective countries (Great Britain, The
Netherlands, the United States, Sweden,
the USSR, and Australia). Each country
approaches the problems of state geriatric
care somewhat differently, and each article stresses different aspects of the problem. Thus, one of the more valuable features of this book is comparative information on the epidemiological, medical, and
social factors involved in geriatric care.

271
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

272 Book Notes

DRUGS AND SEx: By Weldon L. Witters
and Patricia Jones-Witters. Macmillan
Publishing Co., New York, 1975. 459

pp. $5.95 (paper).

Almost three-fourths of this book is devoted to drugs. Beginning with chapters
on nervous system structure, physiological
aspects of pain and how it is relieved, and
the effects, tolerance, and dependence on
drugs, the Witters provide a detailed classification of drugs. Separate and comprehensive chapters follow on the hallucinogens, stimulants, depressants, and
derivatives of opium. The last part of the
book deals with the human sexual response, sexual anatomy and physiology,
contraception, abortion, venereal disease,
pregnancy, and childbearing.

HUNGER AS A FACTOR IN HUMAN AFFAIRS: By Pitirim A. Sorokin. University of Florida Press, Gainesville, 1975.
319 pp. $12.50 (hardbound).

The ngted sociologist Sorokin wrote this
book during the great Russian famine of
1919-21. Only the original manuscript escaped destruction by Russian censors in
1922. It Jay untouched for half a century
until translated into English for the present publication by Sorokin’s wife, Elena.
In Part I, Sorokin discusses the consequences of starvation on physiological,
psychological, and behavioral attributes.
The second part is devoted to sociological
effects of hunger, including food production, exportation and importation, peaceful emigration, war, criminality, and various aspects of social disorganization.

POPULATION AND SOCIAL ORGANIZATION:
Edited by Moni Nag. Mouton Publishers, The Hague, and Aldine Publishing Co., Chicago, 1975. 367 pp. $16.50
(hardbound).

Social Biology

Three parts comprise this collection of
thirteen articles: Kinship, Marriage, and
Fertility; Population Policy and Family
Planning; and Migration. The contributors deal mostly with the effects
exerted by sociocultural variables on certain demographic parameters. Examples
include how fertility is influenced by marriage and kinship, cultural factors that relate to population growth, social variables
affecting mass acceptance of vasectomy,
and social change and female attitudes
toward contraception. As with some of the
other volumes in the “World Anthropology” series, this is an intermediate-level
collection that stresses the importance of
an interdisciplinary approach.

NONHUMAN PRIMATES IN BIOMEDICAL
RESEARCH: By William Montagna.
University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1976. 147 pp. $9.50 (hardbound).

This is the third volume of the Wesley
W. Spink Lectures on Comparative Medicine. It is an informally written and wellillustrated introduction to the behavior
and biology of nonhuman primates, but
Montagna places special emphasis on the
role that primates occupy in biomedical
research. After a background presentation
of primate natural history, general aspects
of primate behavior, and specific behavioral patterns within a group of
Japanese macaques, Montagna discusses a
variety of diseases common to nonhuman
primates and humans. Of particular interest in this section are comments on the
ways that investigators use primates for
understanding human diseases and on
how various therapeutic measures have
been developed through primate experimentation.

HEREDITY, ENVIRONMENT, AND PERSONALITY. A STUDY OF 850 SETS OF

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 3

Twins: By John C. Loehlin and Robert
C. Nichols. University of Texas Press,
Austin, 1976. 202 pp. $8.95 (hardbound).

This extensive series of twins was tested
by means of questionnaires sent to them
and to their parents to determine the interaction between heredity and environment on individual differences in personality, ability, and interest. The topics of
prime interest include the similarities and
differences between twins and nontwins;
the similarities and differences between
identical and fraternal twins; the genetic
and environmental factors involved in the
development of personalities and interests
of twins; and how heredity and environment jointly affect psychological development. Of particular use are the appendices that reproduce the questionnaires
and the basic data.

NEURAL MECHANISMS OF LEARNING AND
Memory: Edited by Mark R.,
Rosenzweig and Edward L. Bennett.
The MIT Press, Cambridge, 1976. 637
pp. $29.50 (hardbound).

This volume contains thirty-nine reports given during a 1974 conference organized to elucidate the neural processes
involved in learning and memory. The
book is arranged into thirteen general
areas, including (a) Biology of Human
Memory, (6) Information Processing and
Memory, (c) Neural Modeling and Memory, (d) Varieties of Animal Learning and
Adaptation: Ethological and Experimental Approaches, (e) Ontogeny of Learning
and Memory, (f) Effects of Differential
Experience on Brain and Behavior, (g)
Biochemical Approaches to the Study of
Memory, (#) Synaptogenesis, Stressing
Plasticity, (¢) Simple Systems in the Study
of Memory: Tissue-Culture Approaches,
() Plasticity in Invertebrates, (k) CNS

Book Notes

273

Manipulation in the Study of Memory:
Drugs, (1) CNS Manipulation in the Study
of Memory: Electrical Stimulation, and
(m) CNS Manipulation in the Study of
Memory: Lesions. The orientation of the
book is strongly methodological. Neural
processes are examined by means of electrophysiology, quantitative neuroanatomy, electron microscopy, biochemistry,
behavioral psychology, and informationprocessing mathematics.

KENNETH A. BENNETT
