Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

The effects of variable age-of-onset and diagnostic
criteria on the estimates of linkage: An example
using manic-depressive illness and color blindness

Lois A. Morton & Kenneth K. Kidd

To cite this article: Lois A. Morton & Kenneth K. Kidd (1980) The effects of variable
age#of#onset and diagnostic criteria on the estimates of linkage: An example
using manic#depressive illness and color blindness, Social Biology, 27:1, 1-10, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1980.9988398

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1980.9988398

 

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB ann | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 4
N
iQ View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 20 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

The Effects of Variable Age-of-onset
and Diagnostic Criteria on the Estimates of Linkage:
An Example Using Manic-depressive Illness and

Color Blindness

Lois A. Morton and Kenneth K. Kidd

Department of Human Genetics
School of Medicine

Yale University

New Haven, Connecticut

 

ABSTRACT: Three pedigrees were selected from the literature for their compatibility with the hypothesis of linkage between the X-chromosome marker color blindness and bipolar affective disorder. We compared the results of linkage analyses of these pedigrees when both penetrance function
and diagnostic classification were varied. The analyses show that the incorporation of age-of-onset
information into a penetrance function significantly increased the evidence for linkage. In addition,
assumptions about diagnostic classification affected the lod scores. These results demonstrate the
need for careful consideration of diagnostic criteria and variable age-of-onset when pursuing

linkage analysis of complex traits.

The use of linkage analysis in manicdepressive illness (MDI) and in other psychiatric disorders has become widespread
in recent years. Because linkage analysis is
a potential means of identifying a genetic
vulnerability or predisposition and of
defining subtypes of illness, it has been applied to many families in which manicdepressive illness has been diagnosed in
several members.

However, the specific method generally used makes several assumptions
which are not met by MDI. Most available
algorithms assume etiologic homogeneity,
complete and constant penetrance (the
probability of observing the phenotype,
given a specific genotype), a single affected phenotype, and unbiased ascertainment of pedigrees. The methods have not
been tested for robustness, so that the effects of violating these assumptions are
unknown. These problems make interpretation of many early studies of genetic
linkage in MDI impossible.

More recently, studies using methods
which permit one or more of these restrictive assumptions to be removed have been

published (Mendlewicz et al., 1979;
Gershon et al., 1979). But the results of
these two groups are contradictory, and
neither group tested the effect of incorporating their more flexible assumptions
into the methods.

It is our intent to assess the importance
of incorporating age-dependent penetrance and variable diagnostic criteria into
a linkage analysis using a subset of the
published pedigrees which have been cited as evidence for X-linkage of MDI.

GENETIC LINKAGE ANALYSIS

Genetic linkage is the nonrandom assortment in meiosis of alleles at different
loci because the loci involved are located
on the same chromosome. During meiosis
the two chromosomes of a pair—the one
of paternal origin and the one of maternal
origin—can exchange blocks of corresponding genetic material through a
process called recombination. Except for
this process, the gametes produced by an
individual would contain for each chromo
 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

4 Morton and Kidd

some pair either an intact chromosome of
paternal origin or an intact chromosome
of maternal origin. When the specific alleles at two loci differ in the maternal and
paternal chromosomes, gametes produced can contain either a parental combination of alleles (maternal or paternal!)
or a recombinant arrangement. The
process of recombination occurs independently in each separate cell undergoing
meiosis and the crossover position is randomly distributed among different meiotic
events. The frequency with which recombination will occur between two loci is a
function of the physical distance along the
chromosome between those two loci.
Genetic linkage is measured as the recombination frequency, 8, which can be zero
for loci immediately adjacent to each
other or any value up to 0.5, the frequency
of recombinant gametes when the two loci
segregate completely independently.
Maximum likelihood estimation of 0
requires the calculation of the probability
that the phenotypic patterns found in a
particular family would occur given a
specific hypothesis that incorporates the
parameter 0. Ina strict sense this probability is proportional to, but can conveniently
be considered equal to, the likelihood of
that specific hypothesis given the data.
These likelihoods are computed for
several different values of 0, including
@=0.5, i.e., independent segregation.
The statistic employed to assess the
significance of likelihood differences is the
lod score. This is the logarithm (to the
base 10) of the ratio of the likelihood at a
specific estimate of @ to the likelihood at
§=0.5, i.e., the null hypothesis of independent assortment. The lod scores of all
informative families are summed for each
hypothesis (i.e., value of 8) in arriving ata
total lod score. A total lod score of + 3.00
is considered to be significant evidence in
favor of linkage at that value of 6, and a
total lod score of —2.00 is considered

Social Biology

significant evidence against linkage at that
value of 6.

Of course, there are many other parameters in a given genetic hypothesis,
specifically the gene frequencies and
genotype penetrances for each of the loci.
But this method was originally developed
(Morton, 1955) and implemented for loci
with known modes of inheritance; thus the
only unknown parameter was 8. Obviously the problem of parameter estimation becomes much more complicated as
the number of unknown parameters increases.

X-LINKAGE IN DEPRESSION

Although patterns consistent with Xlinked transmission of depression were
observed several decades ago (Rosanoff et
al., 1935), reports of linkage to specific Xchromosome markers are much more recent. These studies have both benefited
from and affirmed the validity of the unipolar-bipolar diagnostic distinction. Unipolar affective disorder is characterized by
episodes of extremely depressed mood
which result in a specific pattern of symptomatology and impaired functioning. Bipolar affective disorder is characterized by
alternating episodes of depressed and
manic moods.

Most of the pedigrees studied for Xlinkage of MDI were ascertained through
a proband with bipolar affective disorder,
although both diagnoses were present in
relatives. Reich et al. (1969) first reported
linkage of bipolar MDI with color blindness (protan and deutan) in two large
families. Mendlewicz and Fleiss (1974),
Winokur and Tanna (1969), and Mendlewicz et at. (1972) reported other pedigrees
informative for linkage analysis between
bipolar affective disorder and several X
chromosome markers (protan, deutan,
and Xg).

The findings of these studies can be
summarized as follows: Alleles at each of

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 1

the three marker loci cosegregated with
the depressive phenotype in a fashion consistent with linkage. When summed over
all families, the lod scores reported by
Mendlewicz and Fleiss (1974) were above
3.00 for protanopia (with the estimate
6=0.10) and for deuteranopia (6 = 0.07).
However, many investigators have
published documented cases of father-toson transmission, a finding which is not
consistent with X-linkage.

COMPLICATIONS IN LINKAGE ANALYSIS

The contradictory findings of male-tomale transmission and linkage to X chromosome markers have led to the postulation of genetic heterogeneity in the
etiology of MDI. Many investigators favor
the hypothesis that two predominant
genetic forms exist, one X-linked and one
autosomal, although these forms have not
been separable on the basis of any criteria
other than transmission patterns. The possibility of genetic heterogeneity substantially complicates the use of linkage analysis. If one sums lod scores over all
available pedigrees, it is quite probable
that significant linkage in one of the
genetic forms would be masked by the
finding of independent segregation of
marker and illness in pedigrees of the
other form. Yet it 1s certainly invalid to
sum lod scores over only those pedigrees
which show cosegregation. Even the selection of pedigrees on the basis of transmission patterns alone may be introducing
a bias, which is difficult to quantify,
toward a finding of linkage with an appropriate marker.

Incomplete penetrance of the phenotype, i.e., a less than perfect correspondence between susceptible genotype and
illness phenotype, presents several additional problems for linkage analysis. In
simple terms, unaffected individuals fall
into two classes: those who possess the abnormal allele but fail to express it, and

Estimates of Linkage 3

those who do not possess an abnormal allele. In the case of depression, which has a
variable age of onset extending throughout much of adolescence and adulthood,
unaffected individuals may be of yet
another type: those who are genetically
vulnerable and will express the phenotype
later. Thus, penetrance increases with
age. For MDI, penetrance is probably
both age-dependent and incomplete, 1.e.,
even susceptible individuals surviving
through the age of risk probably have a
less than 100% chance of expressing the
phenotype. In linkage analysis, penetrance is important in determining the
probability that an individual is a recombinant. Correction for age-dependent penetrance requires estimation of the age-ofonset distribution, a task which is
frequently difficult with the available data
(Heimbuch et al., 1980).

Another question which arises when
conducting a linkage analysis of depression is that of diagnosis. Currently, it is
thought that unipolar illness is an alternate expression of the bipolar susceptibility when it is encountered in the families of
bipolar patients. However, unipolar illness is so prévalent (Silverman, 1968) that
some unipolar relatives of bipolar probands may be manifesting an etiologically
distinct disorder. In these cases,
classification of the unipolar relative as affected may lead to incorrect assignment of
recombinant status. In addition, opinions
vary as to whether such diagnoses as questionable affective disorder, cyclothymic
personality, and alcoholism should be
considered expressions of the same
genetic susceptibility in the families of bipolar probands.

REEVALUATIONS OF X-LINKAGE FOR MDI

The failure of early linkage studies to
consider these questions and others led
Gershon and Bunney (1976) to reanalyze
the pedigree data for X-linkage of MDI.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

4 Morton and Kidd

Their analysis of the data took an extremely conservative approach, excluding
those families in which the parental source
of a gene could not be determined unambiguously or in which male-to-male transmission could not be excluded. They also
eliminated those individuals who were
well but less than 25 years of age. Using
these strict exclusion criteria, no evidence
was found for linkage between MDI and
the loci for protan-deutan color blindness
or the Xg locus. Gershon and Matthysse
(1977) also noted problems introduced by
nonrandom ascertainment of families segregating for both the illness and a genetic
marker.

The new studies by Mendlewicz et al.
(1979) and Gershon et al. (1979) have attempted to resolve the uncertainty by collecting additional families using more
defined ascertainment criteria and analyzing the data using more appropriate
methods. Both studies incorporated variable age of onset into penetrance functions
and Gershon et al. (1979) addressed the
question of variable expressivity by computing lod scores using two alternative
diagnostic schemes. The eight families
studied by Mendlewicz et al. (1979) were
consistent with linkage of MDI and color
blindness, although the highest lod score
of 1.55 (at 6=0.15) did not permit
definitive acceptance of the hypothesis. In
addition, they reported significant heterogeneity of lod scores. Gershon et al.
(1979) reported six families for which total
lod scores did not support linkage, although a hypothesis of linkage could not
be rejected in the range for which Mendlewicz et al. reported a maximum value. In
addition, Gershon et al. observed that in
two of the six families lod scores were
slightly in favor of linkage.

Though recognizing the need for more
sophisticated analyses, neither of these recent papers systematically explored the

 

Social Biology

effects of the new variables introduced
into the analysis. Mendlewicz et al. (1979)
did not even specify the age-of-onset distribution actually used. It seems entirely
possible that use of ‘‘correct” age-of-onset
distribution, degree of incomplete penetrance, and range of variable expressivity
would allow detection of genetic linkage
that was not detected using “incorrect”’
values.

To examine this question we have been
exploring the effects of age-dependent
penetrance and variable diagnosis on the
results of linkage analysis for an X-linked
trait. The results of our analyses ilfuminate the problems of genetic linkage
studies and provide some indication of the
robustness of linkage analyses to variations both in the age-of-onset distribution
used and in the diagnostic criteria. These
results do not address the question of Xlinkage for MDI, but rather demonstrate
the importance of using the proper versions of the currently used methods of
linkage analysis when studying psychiatric
disorders. Our conclusions also apply to
studies of other complex disorders with
variable age of onset and variable expressivity.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

We selected three large published pedigrees, the Calvert and Alger families
(Reich et al., 1969) and the family of a
lithium-responsive schizoaffective proband, hereafter referred to as the Baron
family (Baron, 1977). It should be noted
that we did not attempt an unbiased ascertainment; we specifically chose these pedigrees for their compatibility with hypotheses of X-linkage for MDI.

We have modified LIPED Version 3
(Ott, 1976) to permit calculation of the
probability that an individual would ex
: press his/her phenotype, given each possi
ble genotype, as a function of age and/or

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 27, No. 1

sex (Hodge et al., 1979). The agedependent penetrance function to be used
in a particular analysis is specified by a
subroutine that is called from the main
program. The subroutine calculates a set
of penetrances for each individual using
the individual’s age and/or sex according
to a function and parameters that must be
specified. These individualized penetrances are then used in evaluating the
likelihood.

We chose to compare three different
penetrance functions. The first assumed
that penetrance does not vary with age
and is equal to 0.00, 0.75, and 0.85 for normal homozygotes and hemizygotes, heterozygotes, and abnormal homozygotes
and hemizygotes, respectively. The second function, in which penetrance for heterozygotes and for abnormal homozygotes and hemizygotes is 0.00 up to age 14
and increases exponentially to a value of
0.94 at age 100, was suggested by Crowe
and Smouse (1977) after analyzing the
age-of-onset data collected by Winokur et
al. (1969). Finally, we tested a dominant
linear function in which penetrance is 0.00
to age 14 and then increases linearly to
0.94 at age 65 and above. Both the linear
and exponential functions were used in
conjunction with an age-dependent linear
function for phenocopies, in which penetrance is 0.00 to age 14 and then increases
linearly to 0.03 for 65 and older. We did
not consider sex-specific penetrances, but
considered the hemizygote values equal to
those of the respective homozygotes. In
all cases, the gene frequencies for the “‘depressive’ allele and for the colorblindness allele were both assumed to be
0.02.

We considered separately the question
of whether a single genotype may develop
more than one affected phenotype. In order to assess the effects of assuming that
several diagnoses were variable expres
Estimates of Linkage 5

sions of a single genotype, we classified
the individuals in the families as affected
vs. unaffected according to four different
rules: (1) bipolar depression alone was
considered affected; (2) bipolar and unipolar disorder were classified as affected;
(3) bipolar, unipolar, and questionable affective disorder were considered affected;
and (4) bipolar, unipolar, questionable
affective disorder, and alcoholism were labeled affected. In the Alger family, individuals receiving all four diagnoses were
present, resulting in four possible patterns
of illness for that pedigree. The Calvert
family had no one diagnosed as questionable; therefore, only three classifications
were possible. All members of the Baron
family were bipolar, unipolar, or well, resulting in only two possible classifications.
For each penetrance model and each
possible diagnostic classification of the
three families, we computed the likelihood of linkage at ten estimates of 0, the
recombination fraction (0.00, 0.03, 0.06,
0.10, 0.13, 0.16, 0.20, 0.30, 0.40 and 0.50).
This represents a total of 27 sets of likelihoods. In the case of the Alger and
Calvert families, published pedigrees
were modified to eliminate those sections
which were not informative for linkage.

RESULTS

Since we have not addressed the issue
of whether MDI is X-linked, but rather
have looked at the effects of agedependent penetrance and diagnosis on
linkage analyses, we will present here only
illustrative results and not a full lod-score
analysis. First, in most cases we found that
incorporation of a penetrance function
which increases with age yielded results
very different from those obtained under
the assumption of constant penetrance.
Interestingly, we often found that, as in
the case of the Baron pedigree with only

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

6 Morton and Kidd

bipolars considered affected (Figure 1),
results obtained using a linear agedependent penetrance function differed
very little from those using an exponential
age-dependent penetrance function, although both were quite different from results using a constant value. Second, even
when the linear and exponential models
yielded quite different numerical results,
qualitative results were the same. For example, in the case of the Alger family with
all four diagnoses considered affected
(Figure 2), the linear and exponential
models gave different results, but our conclusions about the most likely recombination fraction and the general shape of the
likelihood surface are the same. The constant penetrance function, however,
yielded a different curve and a different estimate of 6. Finally, the Calvert family
with both bipolar and unipolar considered

BARON / BP = AF

     

Log (L)

LINEAR

-10.0 INCREASING

EXPONENTIAL
INCREASING

-t1.0

-12.0

Fig. 1.—Log)o likelihoods for the Baron pedigree
as a function of @, the recombination fraction, using
penetrance functions of three types: one which increases linearly with age, one which increases exponentially with age, and one which is constant for

-allages. Only the diagnosis bipolar affective disorder
(BP) was considered affected.

Social Biology

-200 ALGER / BP, UP, QD, ALC = AF

      
  

-2t.0 EXPONENTIAL

INCREASING

    
   
 

Log (L)
-22.0
LINEAR
INCREASING
-23.0
CONSTANT
-24.0
10 20 30 .40 50
g

Fig. 2.—Logio likelihoods for the Alger pedigree
as a function of 0, the recombination fraction, using
penetrance functions of three types: one which increases linearly with age, one which increases exponentially with age, and one which is constant for
all ages. The diagnoses bipolar affective disorder
(BP), unipolar affective disorder (UP), questionable
affective disorder (QD), and alcoholism (ALC) were
all considered affected.

affected (Figure 3), illustrates another important result. The lod score log,,—
(likelihood at 6 =6 — log ,, (likelihood at
6=0.5)—is greatest for a constant penetrance function, yet the absolute likelihoods of the age-dependent functions are
greater than those of the constant function. This finding illustrates the point that,
when parameters other than 6 are varied,
lod scores obscure the true likelihood
differences for the other parameters.
With respect to variation in diagnostic
classifications, the results are fairly consistent regardless of the penetrance function
employed. For each individual family as
well as for.the total, the inclusion of unipolar affective disorder as affected increased the lod score (see Table 1). For
the Alger family, the addition of individuals with a diagnosis of questionable
affective disorder further increased the
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 1

-9.0 CALVERT / BP, UP = AF

   

-(0.0

EXPONENTIAL
INCREASING

    
 

LINEAR

“11.0 INCREASING
Log (L)
-t2.0
CONSTANT
-13.0
AO .20 30 40 50
8

Fig. 3.—Logio likelihoods for the Calvert pedigree as a function of @, the recombination fraction,
using penetrance functions of three types: one which
increases linearly with age, one which increases exponentially with age, and one which is constant for
all ages. The diagnoses bipolar affective disorder
(BP) and unipolar affective disorder (UP) were both
considered affected.

Estimates of Linkage 7

log,, likelihoods for all three penetrance
functions. The extension of the affected
classification to alcoholism resulted in a
decrease in lod scores for both the Calvert
and Alger families. The magnitude of this
decrease varied depending on the penetrance function.

DISCUSSION

Perhaps the simplest conclusion is that
the results of linkage analyses are dramatically affected by assumptions made in the
handling of the data. Specifically, choice
of a penetrance (or age-of-onset) function
and choice of a diagnostic spectrum can
affect conclusions concerning linkage.
This finding argues strongly both for channeling research efforts into studies which
will improve our knowledge in these areas
and for careful consideration of the sensitivity of our methodologies to the approximations currently used.

Our results demonstrate the importance of incorporating an age-dependent

TABLE 1

Loc LIKELIHOODS OBSERVED WITH VARIABLE DIAGNOSTIC CLASSIFICATION ASSUMING AN
EXPONENTIAL AGE-DEPENDENT PENETRANCE FUNCTION™*

PEDIGREE AND DIAGNOSES

0.1

Alger

BP... cc cc ccc cece ee eae —10.60

BP, UP.... cece cee eee — 18.20

BP, UP,QD................... —18.28

BP, UP, QD, ALCT............. —21.05
Calvert

|) —8,22

BP, UP7'................2200005 — 10.24

BP, UP, ALC.................. —12,29
Baron

BPH... ccc ee cence eens —10.11

BP, UP...... 0... cece eee —9,39

0.3 0.5 6
—10.60 — 10.60 0.00
—18.75 — 19.30 0.00
—19.06 —19.74 0.00
—21.65 —22.03 0.00

—8.22 —§8.22 0.50
—10.93 —11.55 0.00
—12.94 —13.46 0.00
—10.72 . —11.39 0.00
—10.25 —11.28 0.00

*Logio likelihoods computed using different classification schemes are not directly comparable because the data change as
diagnostic criteria change. Note, however, that the observed evidence for linkage, based on likelihoods at various values of 6, changes
depending on the diagnostic classification assumed. BP is bipolar affective disorder; UP is unipolar affective disorder; QD is questionable affective disorder; ALC is alcoholism; and 6 is the value of @ which corresponds to the maximum log ig likelihood.

tLogio likelihoods observed for these pedigrees employing different penetrance functions are presented in Figures 1-3.
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

8 Morton and Kidd

penetrance function into analyses ofa trait
such as MDI for which risk is known to
vary with age. However, in this small
number of families the choice of a specific
age-dependent function, as long as it
roughly approximated age-of-onset data,
was less important than the decision to
employ some reasonable function. This
finding for an X-linked trait is in general
agreement with the report on autosomal
linkage analyses of Huntington’s disease
with three informative genetic markers
(Hodge et al., ms.). These authors also
found that the precise shape of the agecorrection curve had little effect on the lod
scores, while failure to employ any age
correction at all yielded significantly
different lod scores.

In general, our knowledge of agedependent penetrance is still quite limited. There are serious theoretical problems encountered in the estimation of
penetrance and age-of-onset curves from
data on patients (Heimbuch et al.,
1980). For example, although age-ofonset distributions are available for primary affective disorder, many agedependent penetrance functions derived
from these data do not consider population demograhics or genotype- and phenotype-specific morbidities. Some data do
not distinguish between bipolar and unipolar disorder; yet we expect that the distributions for these two diagnoses may be
quite different. For the present, however,
Our results argue that while some function
must be used, an approximate function is
acceptable, although the best available
function is preferable. Ignoring the age
effect for disorders with variable age of
onset may lead to errors both in the numerical results of linkage analyses and in
the conclusions drawn from those results.

The question of which diagnostic categories are part of a single spectrum is also
pertinent in linkage analyses with complex
traits. In many linkage analyses of MDI,

Social Biology

unipolar depression as well as several
other depression-like diagnoses are assumed to be variable expressions of the
“bipolar genotype” when present in the
families of bipolar probands. However,
studies attempting to determine which
diagnostic entities are genetically related
to bipolar affective disorder are quite rare.
The demonstration of increased incidence
of a specific diagnosis among relatives of
bipolar probands would argue for the hypothesis that the two are genetically related, but only evidence of linkage to a
single marker within families or of a single
inherited biochemical defect would constitute proof of genetic identity. It is absolutely critical for the assignment of recombinant/nonrecombinant status’ to
individuals in a pedigree that we know
which of the diagnoses present are likely
to represent alternate manifestations of
the ‘‘depressive genotype” and which are
likely to represent other genetic or nongenetic entities. This question is especially
important because of the high lifetime
prevalence for some form of depression.
Other diagnoses are quite likely to occur
sporadically in large pedigrees by chance
alone.

Not surprisingly, this example has demonstrated that assumptions concerning the
extent of the bipolar spectrum do affect
lod scores and their interpretation. The inclusion of both unipolar depression and
questionable affective disorder and the exclusion of alcoholism from the diagnostic
spectrum consistently gave the highest lod
scores. However, it is inappropriate to
draw any conclusions about the true extent of the spectrum from such a limited
number of families without confirmatory
evidence from independently collected
family prevalence data.

Our results also raise more general concerns about the use of linkage analysis in
complex disorders for which the mode of
inheritance is not known. The likelihoods

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 1

computed are functions of the parameters
of the genetic hypothesis as well as the recombination fraction and should thus be
maximized over all those parameters. In
the MDI example presented in this paper,
uncertainty about age-dependent penetrance and the extent of the diagnostic
spectrum suggests additional parameters
over which the likelihood must be maximized. The result graphed in Figure 2
illustrates one possible consequence of
this complication: The hypothesis which
gives the greatest lod score for linkage is
not the most likely one.

It is important to remember that lod
scores represent only relative likelihoods
useful for comparing different estimates
for a single parameter. They imply nothing about the relative likelihoods of the estimates of other parameters. Therefore,
looking at lod scores alone can be misleading. A linkage problem now has more than
just one parameter because there is uncertainty about the mode of inheritance, the
diagnostic spectrum, and age-of-onset distribution. In theory, the likelihood should
be maximized over all variables, including
not just 6, but also the onset function and
the parameters of the genetic model which
include the relationships between symptoms and genotypes.

Genetic linkage promises to be one of
the most important techniques in clarifying the genetics of complex disorders. For
example, Kravitz et al. (1979) have demonstrated the value of genetic linkage in

 

Estimates of Linkage 9

elucidating the genetics of hemochromatosis. For psychiatric disorders, genetic
linkage provides the best proof of genetic
involvement. Though only a small part of
the genome is currently close to a highly
polymorphic marker, recombinant DNA
techniques should add a large number of
new markers in the next few years,
thereby increasing the feasibility of
linkage studies. However, a word of caution is in order: We have shown that the
situations in which linkage can be most
helpful—the complex disorders—are also
the ones in which the precise assumptions
and methods used can have a great effect
on the results.

Finally, it should be reemphasized that
these results in no way address the question of X-linkage for MDI. However, they
serve to demonstrate the necessity of considering both variable age of onset and
variable expressivity in subsequent
linkage analyses of bipolar affective disorder and many other traits. Our results suggest that, in practice, any reasonable onset
distribution will suffice and that conservative diagnostic criteria will lead to conservative results.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank Dr. Peter Smouse
for lengthy and helpful discussions concerning
this research and the writing of this manuscript.

This work was supported in part by USPHS
Grants NS 11786 and MH 28274.

REFERENCES

Baron, M. 1977. Linkage between an Xchromosome marker (deutan color-blindness)
and bipolar affective illness. Arch. Gen.
Psych. 24:721-727.

Crowe, R. R., and P. E. SmMouse. 1977. The
genetic implications of age-dependent penetrance in manic-depressive illness. J. Psych.
Res. 13:273-285.

GERSHON, E. S., and W. E. BuNNEY, JR. 1976.

The question of X-linkage in bipolar manicdepressive illness. J. Psych. Res. 13:99-117.
GERSHON, E. S., and S. MatTruysse. 1977. Xlinkage: Ascertainment through doubly ill
probands. J. Psych. Res. 13:161-168.

GERSHON, E. S., S. D. Tarcum, S. MATTHYSSE,
and W. E. Bunney. 1979. Color blindness not
closely linked to bipolar illness. Arch. Gen.
Psych. 36:1423-1430.

 
—|
=
©
N
~
oO
=
oO
oO
oO
A
Co
©
Co
mn
oN
=
—
S
‘=
ws
oN
—
oo
O
S
Ce
©
>>
—
oo
N
Some
oO
>
os
c
~.
va)
Oo
cv
oO
co
so
©
—
c
S
©
A

10 Morton and Kidd

HEIMBucH, R. C., S. MATTHYSSE, and K. K.
Kipp. 1980. Estimating age-of-onset distributions for disorders with variable onset. Amer.
J. Hum. GENET, 32: 564—574.

HopcE, S. E., L. A. Morton, S. TIDEMAN, K. K.
Kipp, and M. A. Spence. 1979. Age-of-onset
correction available for linkage analysis
(LIPED). Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 31:761-762.

Hodge, S. E., M. A. Spence, B. F. Crandall, R.
S. Sparkes, M. C. Sparkes, M. Crist, and S.
Tideman. Huntington’s disease: Linkage
analysis with age-of-onset corrections. Amer.
J. Med. Genet. 5:247-254.

Kravitz, K., M. SkoLnick, C. CANNINGS, D. CarMELLI, B. Baty, B. Amos, A. JoHNSON, N.
MENDELL, C. Epwarps, and G. CARTWRIGHT.
1979. Genetic linkage between hereditary hemochromatosis and HLA. Amer. J. Hum.
Genet. 31:601-619.

MENDLEWICzZ, J., and J. L. Fietss. 1974. Linkage
studies with X-chromosome markers in bipolar (manic-depressive) and unipolar (depressive) illness. Biol. Psych. 9:261-294.

MENDLEWICczZ, J., J. L. Fieiss, and R. R. Fieve.
1972. Evidence for X-linkage in the transmission of manic-depressive illness. J. Amer.
Med. Assoc, 222:1624-1627.

Social Biology

MENDLEwiIcz, J., P. LinKowski, J. J. GuRorFF,
and H. M. Van Praaa. 1979. Color blindness
linkage to bipolar manic-depressive illness.
New evidence. Arch. Gen. Psych.
36:1442-1447.

Morton, N. E. 1955. Sequential tests for the detection of linkage. Amer. J. Hum. Genet.
7:277-318.

Ott, J. 1976. A computer program for linkage
analysis of general human pedigrees. Amer. J.
Hum. Genet. 28:528-529.

Reicu, T., P. Clayton, and G. WINoxkur. 1969.
Family history studies: V. The genetics of mania. Amer. J. Psych. 125:1358-1369.

RosanorF, A. J., L. M. Hanpy, I. R. PLEsserT.
1935. The etiology of manic-depressive syndromes with special reference to their occurrence in twins. Amer. J. Psychiat. 91:725-762.

SILVERMAN, C. 1968. The epidemiology of depression. The Johns Hopkins Univ. Press,
Baltimore.

WINoKuR, G., P. J. CLayTon, and T. REIcH.
1969. Manic depressive illness. C. V. Mosby,
St. Louis.

Winokur, G., and V. L. TANNA. 1969. Possible
role of an X-linked dominant factor in manicdepressive disease. Dis. Nerv. Syst. 30:80-94.

 
