Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Genetic screening and genetic counseling:
Knowledge, attitudes, and practices in two groups
of family planning professionals

Edwin W. Naylor

To cite this article: Edwin W. Naylor (1975) Genetic screening and genetic counseling:
Knowledge, attitudes, and practices in two groups of family planning professionals, Social
Biology, 22:4, 304-314, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1975.9988187

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1975.9988187

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB crs | ei
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 5
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 3 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Genetic Screening and Genetic Counseling:
Knowledge, Attitudes, and Practices in
Two Groups of Family Planning

Professionals

Edwin W. Naylor

Department of Pediatrics

Division of Human Biochemical Genetics
State University of New York ot Buffalo
Buffalo, New York

In the past, public health agencies have
primarily been involved with communicable
diseases and environmental hazards. Today
this emphasis is beginning to change. The
control of infectious diseases brought about
by improved methods of diagnosis, treatment, and prevention has greatly increased
the relative importance of genetic disorders.
However, the importance of genetics in
public health practice has only recently
been appreciated (Anderson and Bannerman, 1965; Honeyman and Gabrielson,
1968; Fraser Roberts, 1969; Commission
on Population Growth and the American
Future, 1972), and the application of
genetic knowledge and techniques in the
understanding and solution of public health
problems has only begun.

The establishment of mass population
screening programs for the detection of
abnormal genotypes is becoming a reality.
Since 1962, 43 states have enacted laws
which make mandatory the screening of
all newborns for phenylketonuria (PKU).
This step has established a public health

 

responsibility for genetic screening which
can and, in a few areas, already is being
extended to include other inherited diseases
such as galactosemia, maple syrup urine
disease, and homocystinuria (Guthrie,
1972). Older children and adults in some
high-risk populations are also being
screened for sickle cell anemia (Barnes
et al., 1972) and Tay-Sachs disease (Kaback et al., 1974).

As these large-scale genetic screening
programs are established, they pose new
challenges to public health agencies. It is
inevitable that existing comprehensive
health care services will be put to the test.
Prenatal clinics will be asked to utilize
amniocentesis in providing prenatal diagnoses of potential genetic disorders; maternal and child health services will be
called upon to provide more and better
facilities for diagnosing and counseling
families and children with genetic disorders; and other clinics working with
clients in their reproductive years, such as
premarital counseling services and family

304

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 22, No. 4

planning clinics, will be asked to provide
prospective genetic screening and counseling.

Before these extra responsibilities are
placed on existing health care services, it
is necessary to determine the willingness
and the ability of these services to accept
a role in genetic screening and counseling.
The study presented here is a modified
KAP study, designed to measure the current knowledge, attitudes, and practices
regarding genetic screening and counseling
among two groups of health care professionals directly involved in counseling
clients seeking information on family planning.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

A forty-question modified KAP questionnaire was developed to be either selfadministered or administered by a trained
interviewer. Two distinct professional
groups, both involved in counseling patients seeking family planning information,
were selected for the study. One group
consisted of the membership of a professional society of obstetricians and gynecologists in the Pittsburgh area. The second
consisted of the professional staff of the
Family Planning Council of Southwestern
Pennsylvania, Inc. This organization,
funded by the United States Department
of Health, Education and Welfare, serves
as the planning and development arm for
family planning in southwestern Pennsylvania. Its member clinics include major
hospital clinics, neighborhood health centers, family life centers, miners’ clinics,
free clinics, and Planned Parenthood centers.

All questionnaires completed by the
obstetrical and gynecological (Ob/Gyn)
physicians were self-administered and were
returned by mail. Among the Family Planning Council (FPC) staff, 27.5 per cent

Genetic Screening and Genetic Counseling 305

were self-administered, the balance being
completed by trained interviewers. The
completed questionnaires were scored and
coded, and the results were placed on general purpose punch cards. The data were
analyzed with the aid of a CDC—6400 computer, using a standard SPSS (Statistical
Package for the Social Sciences) program.
Using this program, relevant marginals and
cross-tabulations were obtained. The significance of all statistical associations was
based on chi-square analysis.

RESULTS

Of the questionnaires mailed to 106
Ob/Gyn physicians, 67 were returned completed (63 per cent). Within the Family
Planning Council, 14 of the 16 member
clinics agreed to participate in the study.
The total professional staff of all member
clinics at that time was estimated to be
128. Of this. number, 102 individuals participated in the study (80 per cent). While
the Ob/Gyn physicians were professionally
homogeneous, the FPC staff was not. Physicians and staff nurses made up 28 per
cent of the sample; nurse counselors and
social workers, 22 per cent; nursing assistants and outreach workers, 25 per cent;
and administrative personnel, 25 per cent.

A summary of the general social make-up
of the groups indicated that the two samples were demographically representative
of the larger professional populations from
which they were drawn. The male to female
ratio in the Ob/Gyn study was 8 to 1, while
in the FPC study it was 1 to 4. The racial
composition of both groups was an approximate 4 to 1 Caucasian to Negro ratio. The
mean age of respondents in the Ob/Gyn
study was 52 years, while in the FPC study
it was 42 years. A large majority in both
groups were married. The Ob/Gyn physicians and FPC staff had an average family
size of 2.7 and 1.6, respectively. The reliDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

306 Naylor

gious make-up of the Ob/Gyn study was
37 per cent Protestant, 43 per cent Catholic, and 20 per cent Jewish. In the FPC
study, these figures were 48 per cent, 32
per cent, and 20 per cent.

A summary of certain social attitudes of
the respondents indicated a generally liberal attitude toward family planning practices. Each group perceived the ideal family
size to be 2.5 children, and about 80 per
cent indicated they regularly used some
form of contraception. Nearly 100 per cent
felt contraceptive services should be a part
of community public health programs. Voluntary sterilization was considered an acceptable method of birth control by 82 per
cent of the respondents. A majority approved of abortion for any good reason.

To understand better the respondents’
knowledge, attitudes, and practices concerning genetic screening and genetic counseling, it was necessary to obtain some idea
of the extent to which genetic problems
might have influenced the respondents’
personal lives and to obtain an idea of
their formal genetic education and training. A number of individuals indicated that
some member of their family had a condition or defect which they believed to be
inherited. This included 9 per cent of the
Ob/Gyn physicians and 22 per cent of the
FPC staff.

The most common condition mentioned
by the Ob/Gyn physicians was Down’s
syndrome (3 of 6 affirmative responses),
while diabetes was the most frequently
mentioned by the FPC staff (7 of 22 responses). Only one of those in the Ob/Gyn
study and 13 per cent in the FPC study
indicated that they or some member of
their family had received genetic counseling from an established genetic clinic or a
private physician. Most respondents who
received counseling, however, indicated no
previous family history of genetic disease.

A summary of the formal and informal

Social Biology

genetic education received by the respondents indicated that nearly 45 per cent of
the Ob/Gyn physicians had received no
genetics as part of their professional training. Only a few members of the FPC staff
had ever had a separate course in genetics,
but 56 per cent received some genetics as
part of another course. Approximately 64
per cent of the Ob/Gyn physicians had attended genetics-related courses, workshops,
or lectures or had had clinical experiences
involving genetics since completion of their
basic professional education, compared to
44 per cent among the FPC staff. The number of Ob/Gyn physicians who had read an
article or textbook on genetics in the past
year was 78 per cent, compared to 62 per
cent among the FPC staff.

KNOWLEDGE OF BASIC GENETIC
PRINCIPLES

Seven questions were designed to measure the respondents’ knowledge of basic
genetic principles. The results are summarized in Table 1. The best-understood
concept was the increased risk of Down’s
syndrome in children born to women over
40 years of age. Nearly 90 per cent of the
Ob/Gyn physicians were aware of this fact,
compared to 85 per cent among the FPC
staff. However, 12 per cent of the Ob/Gyn
physicians and 30 per cent of the FPC staff
who understood the age risk did not know
that Down’s syndrome is caused by a chromosomal aberration. The fact that sickle
cell anemia is the result of an inherited
hemoglobin defect was the next best understood, with 85 per cent of the FPC staff
and 81 per cent of the Ob/Gyn physicians
answering correctly. The slightly better
showing among the FPC staff is probably
due to the member clinics having been involved in sickle cell testing during the preceding two years. A correct response to the
question concerning the recurrence risk of
phenylketonuria (PKU) depended on the

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 22, No. 4

 

Genetic Screening and Genetic Counseling 307

TABLE 1

SUMMARY OF RESPONSES TO SEVEN MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS DESIGNED TO MEASURE
THE KNOWLEDGE OF BASIC GENETIC PRINCIPLES

 

Questions and Answers

1. What is the basic unit of inheritance? (Gene)

2. What do you feel mental retardation is primarily due to?

(Combination of heredity and environment) ...

3. What is sickle cell anemia the result of?

(Inherited hemoglobin defect) ............06..

4, What is Down’s syndrome the result of?

(Chromosome abberation) .........0ccceeeeees

5. At what age does a woman have the greatest risk of having a Down’s

syndrome child? (40 years and over} .........

6. Which condition cannot be detected by prenatal diagnosis?

(Sickle cell anemia) .......... cece eee eee eees

7. What is the recurrence risk of PKU? (25%)

* Results expressed as percentage responding correctly.

correct understanding of the recessive nature of the conditions as well as the 25 per

cent recurrence risk. Respondents showed .

the least comprehension of these facts.
To obtain an overall knowledge score,
the number of correct responses to the
seven questions were scored on a scale from
0 to 7. These results are shown in Table 2.

TABLE 2

OVERALL GENETIC KNOWLEDGE SCORE BASED ON
THE NUMBER OF CorRECT RESPONSES TO
SEVEN QUESTIONS

Ob/Gyn FPC

Score Study* Study*
O oii. cead pte n cde eedamns bs 1.5 Zee
| re eae 2.0
2 onseseemensnnewiues wan aue 6.0 12.7
S aebe hima die radon Seweaee 11.9 26.5
4 ccc ccc ccc cence nn ncees 17.9 27.5
5 cece nce e cece ence cnens 28.4 23.5
Gece cece ence sete cccvees 34.3 7.8
7 cece cece ccc ececccccees Te a Ka

Mean score ............ , 4.45 3.32

“ Results expressed as percentage receiving a given score.

As might be expected, the Ob/Gyn physicians scored higher (mean score 4.45) than
the FPC staff (mean score 3.32). None answered all seven questions correctly. In
cross-tabulation analysis of general demographic characteristics, certain social atti
Ob/Gyn FPC
Study* Study*

were ccc cece wer ereccnceese 79.1 52.0
ee ee eee 71.6 69.6
o26 06 OVS TORTS VETERE HERE 80.6 85.3
inte GOS MLS CHAPSI TR OW SEES 77.6 54.9
Jes Re ae Oe ie 89.6 85.3
st Ot i Sa SE YT OO 68.7 34.3
20 6 Oe oe Os tO OD 46.3 41.2

tudes, genetic background, and genetic
education with the attained genetic knowledge score, only one significant association
was noted. This association was with those
respondents in the FPC study who indicated they had attended genetics-related
courses, workshops, or lectures, or had had
clinical experiences involving genetics since
completion of their basic professional education. The mean genetic score of this
group was 4.42 compared to 3.49 for those
who had not had this kind of training or
experience (~ equals 0.001). This finding
indicated considerable success for geneticsrelated training programs within the Family Planning Council.

Once a measure of the general genetic
knowledge of the respondents was obtained,
an attempt was made to determine the extent to which they were aware of existing
genetic screening programs and genetic
counseling services. The results of a question concerning identification of large-scale
Screening programs being carried out in the
United States showed that only 50 per cent
of the Ob/Gyn physicians correctly mentioned PKU screening and sickle cell
screening as examples. Fewer respondents
in the FPC study mentioned PKU screenDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

308 Naylor

ing, but 77 per cent correctly mentioned
sickle cell screening. Again, this finding is
probably the result of recent sickle cell
screening being done by member clinics.
About 19 per cent of the respondents mentioned less well-known screening programs
for conditions such as Tay-Sachs disease,
diabetes, and Rh incompatability.

In analyzing the cross-tabulation data,
two significant associations were noted.
The first was an association in the FPC
study between a belief that voluntary sterilization is an acceptable method of birth
control and the extent of knowledge of existing genetic screening programs. Over 50
per cent of the respondents who believed in
voluntary sterilization knew of two screening programs, compared to only 31 per cent
for those who did not believe in voluntary
sterilization (p equals 0.003). The second
interesting association involved the genetic
educational background of the respondents.
In the Ob/Gyn study, 53 per cent of those
whose basic professional education included
a separate course in genetics and 73 per
cent of those who had genetics as part of
another course knew of at least two screening programs, compared with only 27 per
cent of those whose professional education
did not include formal genetic training.

Within the Pittsburgh area, there were
two established genetic counseling clinics
that provided formal genetic counseling
services when this survey was taken. One
was located at the Magee-Women’s Hospital; the other, at the Children’s Hospital
of Pittsburgh. The respondents were asked
to identify the two established genetic clinics in the Pittsburgh area. Their responses
Indicated that the larger and more active
clinic at the Magee-Women’s Hospital was
better known. Approximately 64 per cent
of the Ob/Gyn physicians were aware of its
existence compared to 38 per cent of the
FPC staff. On the other hand, only 33 per

Social Biology

cent in the Ob/Gyn study and 27 per cent
in the FPC study were aware of the clinic
at Children’s Hospital. In addition, a small
number of respondents mentioned the local
Sickle Cell Society as a genetic counseling
clinic. While this society provided counseling to patients with sickle cell anemia, it
was almost exclusively of a socioeconomic
nature rather than true genetic counseling.

Cross-tabulation analysis revealed a
number of significant associations. The
first was found in the Ob/Gyn study
between the respondent’s race and his
knowledge of established genetic clinics.
Approximately 81 per cent of the Caucasian Ob/Gyn physicians were able to identify one or both clinics, while only 47 per
cent of the Negro physicians correctly
identified one or more clinic (p equals
0.007). Another association was found between family participation in genetic counseling from an established genetic clinic or
a private physician and knowledge of established genetic clinics. A highly significant
negative association was found in the FPC
study (~ equals 0.002), where among the
13 respondents who indicated that some
family member had received genetic counseling 86 per cent could not correctly identify either of the two clinics. It seemed
apparent that most had received counseling
from a source other than an established
clinic, most likely from a private physician.

A third association was observed between
the genetic educational background of the
respondents and their knowledge of existing genetic clinics. In this case, the association was with the degree of formal genetic
training received by the FPC respondents.
Approximately 88 per cent of those respondents who had a separate course in genetics
as part of their professional training, and
54 per cent of those who had a section on
genetics as part of another course, correctly
identified one or more clinics. On the other

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

 

 

 

Vol. 22, No. 4

hand, only 35 per cent of those respondents
who had no genetics whatsoever could name
at least one clinic (p equals 0.01).

ATTITUDES TOWARD GENETIC
SCREENING AND GENETIC
COUNSELING

The most important area this study was
designed to measure was the attitude of the
respondents toward genetic screening and
genetic counseling. Six questions were included to measure these attitudes.

When asked their feelings toward largescale genetic screening programs, 52 per
cent of the Ob/Gyn physicians responded
favorably, 9 per cent unfavorably, and 39
per cent had some reservations. In the FPC
study, 67 per cent responded favorably, 2
per cent unfavorably, and 31 per cent had
some reservations. The most common reservation involved the economic and technical
feasibility of such programs. Other reservations ranged from the need for adequate
follow-up counseling to a questioning of the
moral ethics of such programs. The only
Significant association was between the respondents’ attitude toward voluntary sterilization as an acceptable method of birth
control and their attitude toward genetic
screening. In the FPC study, those respondents who found voluntary sterilization
acceptable also tended to support screening. On the other hand, a majority of those
who did not find it acceptable tended to
have some reservations about screening
(p equals 0.04).

The second attitudinal question asked if
the respondent felt the provision of genetic
advice to parents and prospective parents
would increase the responsibility of their
reproductive decisions. In the Ob/Gyn
study, 79 per cent felt it would, 13 per cent
felt it would not, and 8 per cent didn’t
know. In the FPC study, these figures were
88 per cent, 5 per cent, and 7 per cent. The

Genetic Screening and Genetic Counseling 309

only significant association was with the
Ob/Gyn physicians’ attitude toward voluntary sterilization as an acceptable method
of birth control (~ equals 0.04).

The third question asked whether the
respondents felt public funds should be
made available to develop facilities and
train personnel to implement programs in
genetic screening. In the Ob/Gyn study,
60 per cent felt they should, 22 per cent
felt they shouldn’t, and 18 per cent didn’t
know. In the FPC study, the figures were
87 per cent, 3 per cent, and 10 per cent.
The first interesting association was a twofold one. In the Ob/Gyn study, it was
found that married physicians and physicians with two or more children tended to
approve of the use of public funds for
screening. Among physicians with more
than two children, 92 per cent approved,
compared to only 8 per cent for those with
fewer than two children (p equals 0.04).

A second association was observed in the
Ob/Gyn study between the physicians’ attitudes toward voluntary sterilization as an
acceptable form of birth contro] and their
attitudes toward the use of public funds in
genetic screening. Approximately 64 per
cent of the physicians who found voluntary
sterilization acceptable also approved of
the use of public funds in screening. This
figure compared to only 36 per cent for
those physicians who found it unacceptable
(p < 0.02).

The fourth attitudinal question asked
whether the respondents felt public funds
should be made available to develop facilities and train personnel to implement programs in genetic counseling. In the Ob/Gyn
study, 70 per cent felt they should, 18 per
cent felt they shouldn’t, and 12 per cent
didn’t know. In the FPC study, these figures were 84 per cent, 6 per cent, and 10
per cent, The only significant association
was with those physicians who indicated
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

310 Naylor

that a member of their family had had a
condition or defect which was believed to
be inherited (~ equals 0.002).

The fifth attitudinal question consisted
of four parts. It asked whether or not the
respondents felt genetic information should
be a part of the health educational services
offered by four different comprehensive
programs: (a) family planning services,
(5) premarital counseling services, (c) prenatal clinics, and (d) maternal and child
health projects. The results showed 87 per
cent of respondents in the FPC study and
72 per cent in the Ob/Gyn study favored
the inclusion of genetic information in
these health care programs.

Several interesting associations were observed. The first was between responses of
the FPC staff favoring the inclusion of
genetic information as part of family planning services and responses indicating regular use of some form of contraception.
Approximately 91 per cent of the FPC staff
who used contraception favored the inclusion of genetic information, compared to
only 79 per cent of those who did not use
contraception (~ equals 0.0002).

A second association was between responses of Ob/Gyn physicians approving
of genetic information as part of premarital
counseling services and responses approving of abortion when there was reason to
believe the child would be deformed, seriously ill, or mentally retarded. Among the
physicians who approved of abortion under
these circumstances, 73 per cent felt that
genetic information should be part of premarital counseling, compared to only 67%
among physicians who did not approve of
abortion (p equals 0.008).

The third association also involved the
respondents’ attitudes toward abortion.
Among the respondents in the FPC study
who approved of abortion, 93 per cent felt
genetic information should be provided by

prenatal clinics, compared to 78 per cent

Social Biology

for those respondents who did not approve
of abortion (~ equals 0.002).

A fourth association was found in the
FPC study between the reading of articles
or textbooks pertaining to genetics during
the preceding year and approval of genetic
information as part of maternal and child
health projects. Approximately 92 per cent
of the respondents who had read such material also favored inclusion of genetic information, compared to only 82 per cent
for those who had not ( equals 0.02).

The final attitudinal question touched
on the most controversial aspect of genetic
screening, i.e., whether it should be mandatory or voluntary. The respondents were
asked if they felt premarital screening for
genetic disease, with proper follow-up counseling, should be required to protect the
health of future children in a way similar
to premarital veneral disease screening.
Among the Ob/Gyn physicians the responses were mixed: 36 per cent felt it
should be required, 34 per cent felt it
shouldn’t, and 30 per cent didn’t know. In
the FPC study, these figures were 59 per
cent, 27 per cent, and 14 per cent.

Three significant associations were noted.
The first, in the FPC study, indicated that
Protestants and Jews tended to favor required premarital screening, while Catholics tended to oppose it. Approximately 67
per cent of the Protestants and 70 per cent
of the Jews approved, compared to only
39 per cent of the Catholics (p~ equals
0.007).

The second association was with the
respondents’ attitudes toward the acceptability of voluntary sterilization as a
method of birth control. This association
held for both studies. In the Ob/Gyn
study, 41 per cent of the physicians who
approved of voluntary sterilization also
approved of premarital screening, compared to only 9 per cent among those who
disapproved of voluntary _ sterilization

 

 
 

 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. 4

(p < 0.02). In the FPC study, 68 per cent
of the respondents who approved of voluntary sterilization also approved of required
premarital screening, compared to 19 per
cent among those who disapproved of voluntary sterilization (p < 0.0001).

A third association was with those respondents who approved of abortion if
there were reason to believe the child
would be deformed, seriously ill, or mentally retarded. This association also held
for both studies. In the Ob/Gyn study, 46
per cent of the physicians who approved of
abortion under these conditions also approved of required premarital genetic
screening and counseling compared to only
14 per cent among those who disapproved
of abortion under these conditions (p
equals 0.03). In the FPC study, the corresponding figures were 67 per cent and 22
per cent (f equals 0.0001).

PRACTICE OF GENETIC SCREENING
AND GENETIC COUNSELING

The third area this study was designed
to measure was the extent to which the
respondents had actually been involved in
providing genetic services. Three questions
were asked to measure the extent of genetic
screening and counseling practices in the
study populations.

The first question asked whether the respondents had ever participated in a genetic screening program, either as a staff
member or as a consumer. Among the Ob/
Gyn physicians, 34 per cent indicated they
had participated and 63 per cent said they
had not. In the FPC study, these figures
were 38 per cent and 60 per cent. A breakdown of the affirmative responses is presented in Table 3. The Ob/Gyn physicians
indicated greater participation in PKU
screening programs, while respondents in
the FPC study indicated greater participation in sickle cell screening programs. Relatively few respondents had participated

Genetic Screening and Genetic Counseling 311

TABLE 3

SUMMARY OF RESPONDENTS’ PARTICIPATION
In GENETIC SCREENING PROGRAMS

Participation No.

Ob/Gyn physicians
PR oct Bed eene wd bEezenes oe ®awan ue oes
Sickle cell 2.2... ce cece ween ccc cccee
Both PKU and sickle cell ............

Unqualified “yes” response ...........
Consumer ......ccececcceccccecscess

Ww NH wt TO NO

Total wc. ccc ccc ccc cc eee etc ccseeens

FPC staff
PRU Loc. ccc ccc ccc ccc ccs ctccecesens
Sickle cell 2... ccc cca e cece cecceceecs 1
Both PKU and sickle cell ............
Unqualified “yes” response ...........
Consumer .........cccccecvcccscvees
Total ci eine bub 85 040d HEEESR EDGR 39

bt

hb s7W OO ~

exclusively as a consumer. The only significant association was with Ob/Gyn physicians who had attended a genetics-related
course, workshop, etc., following completion of their basic professional education.
Approximately 47 per cent who had received some post-graduate training also
had participated in screening, compared
to only 13 per cent of those who had not
received such training (p < 0.02).

The second and third questions must be
considered together. The second question
asked whether the respondents had ever
provided or been asked to provide genetic
counseling. The third asked if they had
ever referred a patient or client to a genetic
clinic for counseling. In the Ob/Gyn study,
66 per cent of the physicians had either
provided or been asked to provide counseling, while 76 per cent indicated they had
referred patients. In the FPC study, only
26 per cent had ever provided or been
asked to provide counseling, while 34 per
cent had referred patients. A number of
interesting observations were noted in
these results. First, it appeared that a large
number of respondents in both studies were
asked to provide genetic counseling, but
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

312 Naylor

few attempted to provide it. Nearly all referred their patients or clients to an established clinic. In addition, a sizeable number
referred patients without specifically being
asked by the patient for counseling. The
referrals made by the Ob/Gyn physicians
consisted of a wide variety of medical conditions, while those made by the FPC staff
primarily involved sickle cel] anemia.

DISCUSSION

The results from this study indicate that
there is considerable knowledge of basic
genetic principles among the two groups
of respondents. Nevertheless, it is somewhat disconcerting that over 50 per cent
of the Ob/Gyn physicians did not know
the recurrence risk of PKU and over 20
per cent did not know that the gene is the
basic unit of inheritance. While it is true
that over half of the physicians completed
their basic professional education more
than twenty years ago, at a time when
genetics was not a part of medical school
curriculums, it is dismaying that this basic
knowledge has not been acquired through
continuing medical education. The study
also showed that while there is reasonable
knowledge of existing genetic screening
programs and genetic counseling clinics
among both physicians and family planning personnel, the extent of this knowledge could be greater.

It is apparent that continuing medical
education and in-service training programs
must impart a greater knowledge of basic
genetic principles as well as an awareness
of existing screening programs and counseling services. That increased knowledge and
awareness can be successfully achieved is
supported by several observations in this
study: first, the surprisingly good understanding by the FPC staff of maternal age
risk in Down’s syndrome and of the biochemical basis of sickle cell anemia; second, the statistically significant association

Social Biology

in the FPC study between the attained
genetic knowledge score and attendance at
genetic related in-service training programs; and third, the 77 per cent of the
FPC staff who mentioned sickle cell screening as an example of a large-scale program
compared to only 51 per cent of the physicians. These facts all indicate that genetic
knowledge has been increased by adequate
in-service training. It is therefore proposed
that greater efforts be made to incorporate
genetic training into programs of continuing medical education for physicians and
in-service training for family planning professionals.

The study also indicates that there is
considerable support among physicians and
family planning professionals for largescale genetic screening and counseling programs. Significant majorities in both study
populations favor large-scale screening programs and the use of public funds to support them. This attitude is important,
because without the support and acceptance
of physicians and allied health personnel,
who are ultimately responsible for- implementing and following-up initial results,
large-scale screening is not possible. It is
essential that a screening program be economically and technically feasible and well
tested on a limited basis before it is advocated for large-scale use. It is also necessary to carry out extensive education of the
public as well as the medical community
before any mass screening is instituted.

In 1972, the Commission on Population
Growth and the American Future made a
number of recommendations to the President and Congress. Among these recommendations were that private and public
funds should be made available to develop
facilities and train personnel to implement
programs in genetic screening and counseling and that genetic information be part of
the health education services offered in
comprehensive programs where patient

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. 4

counseling is involved, such as family planning services, premarital counseling, prenatal clinics, and maternal and child health
projects. In responding to specific questions
regarding these recommendations, approximately 66 per cent of the Ob/Gyn physicians and 85 per cent of the FPC personnel
supported them.

In addition to the above specific recommendations, the Commission suggested
that the provision of genetic advice to
parents and prospective parents can increase the responsibility of their reproductive decisions. This increased responsibility
is the key to successful genetic screening
and counseling. If people are not going to
utilize the information discovered by
screening and related to them through
counseling, then we are engaged in an
exercise in futility. However, it was encouraging to discover that 79 per cent of
the physicians and 88 per cent of the FPC
Staff felt that the provision of genetic
advice would in fact increase the responsibility of reproductive decisions. lf the
assessment of these health care professionals is correct, it provides some optimism
for the long-term success of genetic screening and counseling programs.

In analyzing the responses to the questions concerning whether the respondent
had been asked to provide counseling or
had referred a patient or client for counseling, several important points can be
made. The first is that the Ob/Gyn physicians indicated considerable utilization of
the two established genetic clinics and apparently did not hesitate to refer patients
for further evaluation and counseling. The
second is an awareness that public health
professionals, such as family planning professionals, can be an important means of
identifying individuals with genetic problems and can refer them to established
genetic clinics for evaluation and counseling.

 

Genetic Screening and Genetic Counseling 313

In this study, more than a third of the
FPC staff indicated that they had either
been asked to provide or else had referred
clients for genetic counseling. These included physicians, nurses, social workers,
and outreach workers. They referred clients
with questions regarding sickle cell anemia,
Down’s syndrome, Rh _ incompatibility,
mental retardation, PKU, Parkinson’s disease, Tay-Sachs disease, high frequency of
fetal deaths, and fear of possible genetic
effects of drugs. The family planning professional generally becomes aware of a
client’s genetic concerns through routine
counseling prior to the provision of contraception or prior to abortion or voluntary
sterilization.

With adequate training and the formal
establishment of a responsibility for genetic referral, it should be possible for public health professionals involved in comprehensive programs such as family planning
services, premarital] counseling, prenatal
clinics, and maternal and child health
projects to become an important part of
a regional genetic program.

Such a program would consist of a central genetic clinic with its sophisticated
diagnostic and resarch capabilities, several
satellite clinics for carrying out routine
counseling on a regional basis, and an extensive network of physicians and health
care professionals who are trained and
alert for genetic problems and who will
refer these patients for genetic evaluation
and counseling.

Such a program should also be closely
coordinated with a comprehensive and regional genetic screening program. Such a
comprehensive screening program might
consist of cord blood, nursery blood, and
urine screening for inborn errors of metabolism, adult screening programs for identification of heterozygotes, and screening
of high-risk pregnancies or families.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

314 Naylor

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work represents a portion of a thesis
written in fulfillment of the M.P.H. degree in
the Population Division of the Graduate School
of Public Health at the University of Pittsburgh. The research was supported in part by
a Special Purpose Traineeship from the U.S.
Public Health Service (#5-A04AH00009-03)

Social Biology

to the University of Pittsburgh. Additional
support was provided by Maternal and Child
Health Service project grants #417 and #435
to the Department of Pediatrics of the State
University of New York at Buffalo.

I wish to thank Dr. John C. Cutler and
especially Dr. B. Thomas Walsh for their help
and support without which this work would
not have been possible.

REFERENCES

Anverson, U. M., and R. M. BANNERMAN. 1965.
Future role of the health department in medical genetics. Amer. J. Publ. Hlth. 55:866-872.

Barnes, M. G., L. Komarmy, and A. H. Novack.
1972. A comprehensive screening program for
hemoglobinopathies. J. Amer. Med. Assoc. 219:
701-705.

CoMMISSION ON PoPULATION GROWTH AND THE
AMERICAN Future. 1972. Report of the Commission on Population Growth and the American Future. Signet, New York.

FRASER Roserts, J. A. 1969. The influence of
heredity on health, p. 299-307. In W. Hobson

(ed.), The theory and practice of public health.
Oxford University Press, New York.

GuTHrig, R. 1972. Mass screening for genetic disease. Hospital Practice, June, p. 93-100.

Honeyman, M. S., and I. W. GaBRIELsON. 1968.
Public health aspects of genetic screening.
Birth Defects Original Article Series 4:9-104.

Kasack, M. M., R. S. ZEIcErR, L. W. REYNOLDs,
and A. H. Novack. 1974. Approaches to the
control and prevention of Tay-Sachs disease,
p. 103-134. In A. G. Steinberg and A. G. Bearn,
Progress in medical genetics. Oxford University
Press, New York.

 
