Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Reversible sterilization: Socio-ethical
considerations

Gale Largey

To cite this article: Gale Largey (1978) Reversible sterilization: Socio#ethical considerations,
Social Biology, 25:2, 135-144, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1978.9988331

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1978.9988331

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lal Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Reversible Sterilization: Socio-ethical

Considerations

Gale Largey

Department of Sociology
Mansfield State College
Mansfield, Pennsylvania

 

ABSTRACT: Recent developments make it appear likely that sterilizations will soon be reversible.
This paper explores the socio-ethical implications of such a development, discussing its potential as
a means of voluntary birth control and, in particular, its use by welfare recipients, the mentally
ill, retardates, and prisoners. The paper underscores the importance of reviewing and discussing
present norms restricting sterilizations and emphasizes the need to formulate public policies

relating to reversing sterilizations.

It seems likely that sterilizations will
soon be reversible (Brueschke, 1976; Guha
et al., 1976; McCormick and Torres, 1976;
Nair, 1976; Gomel, 1977; Jones, 1977;
Silber 1977a,b,d). Such a development can
mean a safer and more effective means of
birth control, but it further complicates
the already complicated socio-ethical issues related to sterilization. In this paper,
I will explore some of the questions posed
by reversible sterilization techniques.

REVERSIBLE STERILIZATION

According to the Association for Voluntary Sterilization, there are presently
about ten million Americans who have
been sterilized (Gonzales, 1976) and, according to the Worldwatch Institute, there
have been an additional sixty-five million
such people worldwide (Stokes, 1977).
Moreover, studies of trends in contraceptive practices indicate a clear and definite
direction toward increased use of sterilization for birth control (Westoff, 1976). Asa
result, it is not surprising that there has
been a great deal of recent medical research aimed at overcoming what many
people view as the most serious drawback

of sterilization—its irreversibility. If nothing else, the sheer number of persons who
have already been sterilized has generated need for reversibility. Winston (1977,
p. 305) has noted that we do not know
how many sterilized persons would like to
have their sterilizations reversed, but he
estimates that the figure may be as high as
15 per cent. And, based upon his study of
103 women who asked for reversal of
sterilization, he concluded the following:

The most important reason for reversal was
remarriage or planned remarriage (patient
remarried or new marriage planned 81, patient feeling incomplete or defeminised 8,
wanted to add to family 4, child died after
sterilization 4, medical reasons (amniocenteses, etc.) 4, and to improve sexual relationship 2. Most patients had divorced, but three
marriages had ended with the husband’s
death. Eight patients (7.7%), still married to
the same husband, requested reversal because they thought that their sexual relationship might improve. Four patients who had
been sterilized because of a genetic disorder
requested reversal because of the recent
availability of amniocenteses.

Responding to this demand, researchers
have developed a variety of reversibility
techniques (Sciarra, 1976; Schima and

135
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

136

Lubell, 1976). Their effectiveness had varied and clearly, at this stage of research
new developments are in process. Still, it
is worth pointing out some of the rather
dramatic reports of successfully reversed
sterilizations in both men and women.
For example, using microsurgical techniques only on male patients, Silber
(1977a,b,c,d), has reported successfully restoring fertility in 21 of 22 men—some of
whom had been sterilized for as long as ten
years. And, using similar techniques on
females, Gomel (1977) reported successfully reversing the sterilizations in 27 of 31
women. Moreover, approximately 73 per
cent of Gemel’s patients who attempted
pregnancy were successful within six
months after the operation (see also
Diamond, 1977; Westoff, 1978).

Finally, human testing of a patented reversible nonsurgical method has been initiated by researchers at the Franklin Institute of Philadelphia. The method is described as follows (Jones, 1977, p. 25):

A hysteroscope, which includes fiberoptics
and a light, is inserted into a woman’s
uterus, permitting view of the fallopian tube
ends. Catalyzed silicone is injected into the
tubes, and within a few minutes cures into a
rubber-like solid. The tubes are blocked,
preventing conception, but each silicone
plug carries an integral tip and ring. At a
later date, these can be used with a special
instrument to withdraw the plugs and restore fertility.

In sum, the medical means of reversing
sterilizations appears to be a probable,
rather than just a possible, developmentin
the near future. Thus, serious consideration of its social and ethical ramifications
is indeed appropriate—especially since
sterilization continues to be advocated by
some people for eugenic and euthenic
aims.

In the remainder of this paper I will
explore some of the implications of reversible sterilization as a means of voluntary

Largey

 

Social Biology

birth control, as a condition for welfare
support, as a condition for conjugal visits
by prisoners’ spouses, and as a means of
birth control for the mentally ill and mentally retarded.

REVERSIBLE STERILIZATION AS A
MEANS OF BIRTH CONTROL

As previously indicated, sterilization
has lost its stigma as an extreme and undesirable method of birth control and is increasingly becoming a preferred contraceptive practice. In fact, as of 1975, a
National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development survey found that
sterilization had become second only to the
pill as the birth control method most favored by Americans, used by approximately one out of three couples. Undoubtedly, prospects for reversibility will make
sterilization even more attractive. But, it
raises some Critical issues:

Should the medical profession encourage sterilization of the spouse whose
sterilization can most easily be reversed?
Prior to 1973, approximately 75 per cent of
sterilizations performed in the United
States were done on males. Since that
time, however, there has been a gradual
shift, and currently more than half are
performed on females. The general reason
given for this shift is that the surgical
method for sterilization of women has become easier and safer. If it becomes possible to reverse sterilization of males more
easily than that of females, then perhaps
we will see a trend back to sterilization of
males. In either case, the ease of reversibility in male versus female sterilization is a
factor to be considered when a physician is
giving advice about which spouse should
be sterilized.

Should the physician only use a sterilization procedure that lends itself to reverstbility? At this point, successful reversals
are often contingent upon the particular

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 2 Reversible
technique that was employed in the sterilization. For example, in discussing their
particular reversal procedure, McCormick
and Torres (1976, p. 623) noted that “it
probably would not be successful in instances of laproscopic tubal ligation because of the excessive tissue destruction of
that procedure.” And, with respect to vasectomy reversal, Silber (1977a, p. 1201)
concluded:

If vasectomy is performed by cauterizing the
abdominal side vas lumen, and doing nothing to the testicular side, a sperm granuloma
is more likely to form, less pressure will develop, and subsequent reversibility is more
probable.

Neither McCormick and Torres nor
Silber indicated exactly how many presently sterilized persons they feel have
been irreversibily sterilized, but Winston
(1977, p. 305) has noted that nearly 38 per
cent of the persons involved in his study
had been sterilized in such a way they
could no longer be considered potentially
reversible. That finding of course raises
the issue of what techniques of sterilization physicians should be encouraged,
perhaps required, to use assuming that the
costs, health risks, and contraceptive effectiveness are considered comparable between sterilization techniques that do and
do not lend themselves to reversibility.

Should legislation governing reversible
sterilization be less restrictive than that
governing irreversible sterilization? During the 1970’s, the United States courts
struck down various laws prohibiting
sterilization. Some legislation, however,
still prohibits sterilization of anyone under
21 and is generally much more restrictive
than that governing other forms of birth
control. If sterilization becomes reversible,
it seems likely that these restrictions will
be challenged on grounds that such sterilization is no more permanent than the pill
or intrauterine devices. It may be argued

Sterilization 137
that the same basic restrictions on each of
the restrictions should apply to all methods of birth control, especially insofar as
age is concerned.

Would widespread use of reversible
sterilization as a means of birth control
pose a threat to human rights? Stokes
(1977, p. 7) has aptly pointed out that
“sterilization poses a human rights issue.
There is no way to insure that a woman
will take her pill every day or that a man
will use a condom. But, sterilization is
different. It does not require the continuous voluntary participation of the individual.” The most dramatic example of the
human rights problems posed by sterilization is the case of India in the mid-1970’s.
Feeling compelled to control population
growth, the Indian government initiated a
crash sterilization program, performing
over seven million sterilizations in one
year. Claims of coercion were widespread,
and subsequent public reaction lead to unseating the ruling Congress Party in the
spring 1977 elections. With the change of
parties came a sharp curtailment of the
program. But still, the situation raises two
points: (1) If sterilization were defined as
reversible, would the Indian government
have been so strongly criticized, and if
not, to what extent would it have expanded the programs? (2) If reversible
sterilization had been the widely practiced
form of birth control in Indian society,
what would have prevented the Indian
government from simply limiting reversals
as a means of population control? (See
Borders, 1976, 1978; Callahan, 1977;
Christiansen, 1977; Gulhati, 1977; Ping,
1976; Sinha, 1977; Warwick, 1976.)

WELFARE RECIPIENTS

In 1973, it was widely reported that a
number of welfare recipients in Alabama,
California, South Carolina, and Tennessee had been sterilized without their fully
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

138

informed consent. In addition, information gathered by the Committee to End
Sterilization Abuse, the Southern Poverty
Law Center, and the National Welfare
Rights Organization offered further evidence that a substantial number of welfare
recipients, Blacks, native Americans, and
Chicanos had been sterilized with federal
funds without their full voluntary and informed consent (Donovan, 1976a,6;
Dreifus, 1975; Huebner, 1975; Rothman,
1977; Spriggs, 1974; Vaughan and Sparer,
1974; Weisbord, 1975).

As a result, there has been series of
court actions to examine the claims and
establish new regulations. In one such action, Federal Judge Gerhard Gesell concluded that there was incontrovertible
evidence that minors and other legal incompetents have been sterilized with federal funds and that an indefinite number
of poor people had been improperly
coerced into accepting a sterilization under
the threat that various federally supported
welfare benefits would be withdrawn
(Rothman, 1977). Subsequently in December, 1977, the Health, Education and
Welfare Department issued new regulations aimed at assuring welfare recipients
that they could not be denied benefits if
they refused sterilization. The regulations
are premised on the assumption that
sterilization is an “irreversible” procedure,
and they include the following provisions
(Rosenbaum, 1977, p. 29):

Require the patient to sign a consent form in
her primary language showing that she understood the consequences of a sterilization
operation.

Require the doctor to state in writing that he
has informed the patient of the risks and
benefits of sterilization and has impressed on
her that she will not lose welfare funds or
other benefits if she declines to be sterilized.

Establish a mandatory waiting period of 30
days between the time a consent form is
signed and the time a sterilization operation,
paid for with department funds, is performed.

Largey

Social Biology

Prohibit payment for sterilization operations
on anyone under the age of 21.

Prohibit Federal payment for hysterectomies
performed solely for birth control.

Establish special procedures to assure that
people in prisons or mental! institutions and
those who are mentally incompetent are not
sterilized capriciously.

The regulations have brought criticisms
from groups arguing that such requirements deny free access to sterilization and
that in effect the regulations make it more
difficult for the poor than other groups to
be voluntarily sterilized. Furthermore,
libertarians view the regulations as arbitrary violations of individual rights.

At this point, the question of the constitutionality of the procedures remains
open. But, in light of advances in reversible sterilization, it seems clear that at least
two points will be raised:

To what extent are current restrictions
on sterilization based upon its irreversibility? If sterilization becomes a reversible
procedure it seems likely that civil libertarians may argue even more strongly for
fewer restrictions on its use. In particular
it seems likely that the age restriction will
be challenged on the grounds that if an
eighteen year old can vote why cannot the
person be sterilized. Yet there will still be
the nagging concern about who ultimately
has the power to reverse the sterilization.
As previously stated, there is a clear difference between depending on a physician
for a prescribed pill which one may use at
one’s own discretion and being totally dependent on a physician to reverse a sterilization. The vulnerability of persons on
public assistance in this respect cannot be
ignored, especially in light of Larsen’s
(1976) study indicating that an upsurge of
fascist attitudes could intensify political
pressure toward the sterilization of chronic
welfare recipients.

To what extent should the government
provide individual welfare recipients who

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 2

have been previously sterilized an opportunity to have their sterilization reversed?
This question raises the issue of the government’s responsibility to identify persons who did not give informed consent
and the government’s obligation to offer
such persons the opportunity to utilize reversal techniques. The operation and cost
of a government program that would provide such an opportunity is obviously a
complex problem. Nonetheless, one must
surely anticipate that at least some of the
persons who have been sterilized against
their wishes will soon claim that the government should restore their fertility.

THE MENTALLY RETARDED

Sterilization of the retarded has historically been controversial. In 1907, when
Indiana enacted the first law legalizing
such sterilizations, it was seen by many as
a way of ending feeble-mindedness, and
soon other states followed with enactment
of their own compulsory sterilization laws.
Since then, there have been over 70,000
known sterilizations of the retarded
(Comer, 1975, p. 175); and, between 1969
and 1974, there were 64 mental retardates
sterilized under a Montana legislation
which specified (Anonymous, 1974):

Sterilization is recommended to all patients
who are physically able and are apt to procreate, and who will be living more or less
independently in the community. It is not
suggested for the severely retarded or for
those such as mongoloids who would be unlikely to procreate. The policy is based upon
the understanding that the mentally retarded
generally unite with mentally retarded mates
and have the risk of reproducing mentally
retarded offspring.

Over the years, the issue of compulsory
sterilization has been argued vehemently
in the courts. Only once, however, has it
reached the U.S. Supreme Court, and in
that 1927 decision (Buck v. Bell) a Virginia sterilization statute was upheld as
constitutional because it was in the com
Reversible Sterilization

139

pelling interest of the state (Moss 1976;
Murdock, 1974). Understandably, many
advocates of the rights of the retarded feel
that another case should be considered by
the Supreme Court in the light of new
evidence about retardation.

Despite the fact that the Supreme Court
has not made a ruling since 1927, there
have been many important decisions in
lower courts which have established a definite trend toward more stringent regulations limiting sterilization of the retarded.
For example, in the Wyatt v. Aderholdt
(1976) decision, Judge Frank Johnson
ruled that all sterilizations for those under
21 are prohibited, except for medical
emergencies, and no sterilizations for
those over 21 are permitted without the
individual’s voluntary and informed consent. Significantly, the decision also stipulated that the substitute consent of a parent or guardian was unacceptable because
such consent was not genuinely voluntary
(Soskin, 1977, p. 43).

In this context, it seems certain that the
reversibility of sterilization is likely to
deepen the controversy surrounding sterilization of the retarded. Some parents of the
growing number of deinstitutionalized retarded individuals are likely to press for
easier sterilization on the grounds that
deinstitutionalization affords greater
likelihood of heterosexual contact and
greater risk of unwanted pregnancy. Some
parents are likely to argue that sterilization supported by substitute consent is a
reasonable precaution that should be permitted if indeed it is reversible.

To what extent are current regulations
on sterilization of'the retarded based upon
the assumption of its irreversibility? The

'In October, 1977, the Supreme Court began
hearing a case (Sparkman vy. Stump) in which a
retarded woman claims she was sterilized against her
will and without informed consent upon the request
of her mother and with the authorization of a judge.
At the time this article was written, the case had not
yet been decided. See also Murdock, 1974.

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

140

explicit importance of the irreversible nature of sterilization with respect to present
laws regulating sterilization of the retarded is not clear. But it does seem that
the advent of reversibility would undercut
some of those regulations. Moreover, there
is also likely to be discussion about
whether reversible sterilization should be
restricted any more than other methods of
birth control—a complicated consideration because trends toward deinstitutionalization have afforded formerly institutionally sterilized retardates an increased opportunity for heterosexual contact.

Under what circumstances should attempts be made to restore the fertility of
previously sterilized retarded individuals?
This question parallels the one raised
about formerly sterilized welfare recipients, but is even further complicated because it raises the issue of the mental competency needed to be a parent. This is
especially an issue if a sterilized retardate
marries an individual who is judged to be
mentally competent. This question may be
a very pertinent one because Sabagh and
Edgerton (1962) found that almost twothirds of discharged mental retardates understood the meaning and implications of
sterilization, discussed their reactions to it,
and expressed disapproval of the sterilization procedure.

THE MENTALLY ILL

Gamer et al. (1976, p. 311) have noted
that children born into the general population have a 1 to 2 per cent chance of developing schizophrenia. But a child born into
a family where at least one parent has
suffered from schizophrenia has a 10 to 15
per cent chance of developing the disorder. Moreover, if the definition of risk is
broadened to include other kinds of emotional disorders, between 20 and 30 per
cent of this high-risk population will be
affected. In a similar vein, El-Guebaly

Largey

Social Biology

and Offord (1977) concluded that offspring
of alcoholic mothers are at increased risk,
particularly for anti-social behavior besides the health risk to the offspring.
Cohler et al. (1975, p. 277) found that the
problems encountered during pregnancy
and childbirth sometimes aggravate the
disturbance of a mentally ill mother. And,
in the same vein, Eisenberg (1977, p. 907)
has noted that when one considers the
difficulties faced by parents, there is reason for concern about having seriously
mentally ill persons caring for children.

Such studies are widely disputed and
challenged. However, they have lent support to advocates of measures to prevent
reproduction by the mentally ill especially
while they are ill or taking medications
that have unknown effects upon the fetus.
McIntire (1973) and Ingle (1973) have contended that (1) a child has a right to be
born of sane and able parents; (2) for its
own good, society has the responsibility to
take actions that will prevent the birth of
individuals who have a high risk of being
or becoming mentally ill; and, (3) society
has the responsibility to protect the mentally ill individual from being burdened
with parental responsibilities which he or
she cannot freely assume. Moreover,
McIntire has suggested that it would not
be any more unreasonable to regulate and
license parenthood than it is to license
marriage or driving.

As with the mentally retarded, public
concern about the procreative behavior of
the mentally ill has intensified because of
changing mental health policies and
treatments. However, unlike welfare recipients and the retarded, the mentally ill
have not been so readily sterilized. Instead, they have been “institutionally
sterilized”, that is, they have been incarcerated and sexually segregated in public or
private institutions and thus denied the
opportunity to procreate. Recently, however, with the extended use of psycho
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 2

tropic drugs and community-based treatment procedures, fewer and fewer of the
mentally ill are “institutionally sterilized”,
and although it is not well documented,
there is some public concern that, due to
inadequate use of the pill and other birth
control measures, there are a growing
number of children being born to persons
who are not able to care for them adequately. In addition, there is public concern about experimental efforts to have
coed wards in mental hospital (Reynolds,
1977).

In this context, the development of reversible sterilization seems likely to further complicate the issue of contraception
for the psychiatrically severely disturbed
population.

Under what circumstances, if any,
should society require a mental patient to
undergo a reversible sterilization as a condition for freedom from institutional
sterilization? The situation of the mentally
ill who have been institutionalized parallels the situation of the mentally retarded.
Clough et al. (1976, p. 604) have noted
that historically “a mental patient may be
protected against pregnancy by being
placed in a locked ward. In the modern
variant, the patient may escape confinement by accepting contraception.” Likewise, Chez (1971, p. 5123) has noted that
the acceptance of contraception is subtly
being introduced “as the prerequisite for
community exposure. That is, replacing
institutional or segregational sterilization
with compulsory contraception.” This
kind of condition or prerequisite obviously
undermines the principle of voluntarism in
the use of bith control, and it raises the
additional issue of the psycho-social effects
of such a sterilization on the recovery of
the patient (Schneider, 1973; Janke and
Wiest, 1976-77; Wood, 1976). It also
raises the very pertinent but difficult questions of when a patient would be sane
enough to have the sterilization reversed

 

Reversible

 

Sterilization 141
and what are the rights of a sane spouse of
an insane patient to bear a child. In short,
besides the individual rights of the patient,
the rights of the patient’s spouse have to be
respected too.

PRISONERS

Prisoners, like some of the mentally retarded and the mentally ill, have traditionally been “institutionally sterilized.”
Society has simply locked up convicted
criminals and held that such individuals
should not be given the opportunity to
reproduce because they could not provide
for the care of their offspring. Moreover
there has been the added argument that
one must consider the right of the offspring, since there is increased risk of psychological problems among children of
imprisoned parents (Sack et al., 1976;
Sack, 1977).

The counter-arguments have been that
the denial of heterosexual opportunity
constitutes “cruel and unusual” punishment, and that it causes unwarranted anxiety, aggression, and disruption of the
prisoner’s life (Rudovsky, 1973). It is
pointed out that enforced abstinence has
been the major cause of rampant
homosexuality in prisons and that the abstinence undermines rehabilitation because
of the difficulties it brings to the spousal
relationship. It is not surprising, therefore,
that Jacobs and Steele (1977, p. 289) have
contended:

Certainly conjugal visitation, the policy most

ameliorative of enforced sexual deprivation,

should be a far more important item on the
prison reform agenda than the myriad of

calls for new counselling and training programs.

There is also the contention that society
should not be denying a convicted criminal’s spouse his or her coital rights.

In this context, it seems likely that the
development of reversible sterilization
may raise some critical questions:

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

142 Largey

Under what circumstances, if any,
would it be permissible to require the use
of reversible sterilization as a condition or
prerequisite for conjugal visits? At this
time, unconditional voluntary use of birth
control is obviously preferred. However,
the possibility of an imprisoned woman
becoming pregnant and giving birth while
imprisoned is one circumstance that is
likely to focus concern about the need fora
certain and effective means of birth control when a prisoner is permitted conjugal
visits.

Under what circumstances, if any,
would reversible sterilization be an acceptable prerequisite for coed prisons?
Ross (1973, p. 176) has noted:

At the moment, it seems reasonably clear
that no court would ever find separate prisons illegal because they violate the Equal
Protection clause. However, if the Equal
Rights Amendment passes, separate prisons
will most certainly be illegal.

If prisons do indeed follow the trends set
in college dormitories, group homes for the
retarded, and mental hospitals, then coed
prisons may soon become acceptable. Yet,
at the same time, such a trend will undoubtedly generate a great deal of concern
about potential offspring, and there will
be the serious issue of exactly how to avoid
such a problem. The appeal of reversible
sterilization is therefore obvious, but here
again the issue may not be voluntary versus compulsory/involuntary _ reversible
sterilization, but rather whether or not society has the right to establish reversible
sterilization as a condition for the privilege
of being sentenced to a coed prison.

Under what circumstances, if any,
should reversible sterilization be denied if
it is requested by a prisoner? Since there is
no recent evidence of prisoners having
been involuntarily sterilized, the.question
of restoring fertility is not so much an issue
as it is with welfare recipients, retardates,

 

Social Biology

and, in some cases, the mentally ill. Still, a
different kind of issue may arise if stringent restrictions are placed on reversible
sterilization, and that is the question of
whether or not an individual prisoner may
control his/her own body to the extent of
having him/herself sterilized. In this respect, there may have to be resolution of
the differences between voluntary reversible sterilization and other voluntary
means of birth control, including abortion.
It is even conceivable that if voluntary
castration is granted to violent sex offenders as an alternative to imprisonment,
then voluntary sterilization may be requested by some individuals convicted of
child neglect/abuse as an alternative to
their imprisonment (see Brown and Courtis, 1977; Rees, 1977).

I fully recognize that the prospects for
such requests are very hypothetical. Yet,
the fact that they could be made does underscore the complex legal and medical
issues to be resolved with the development
of reversible sterilization.

FINAL REMARKS

This paper was meant to be exploratory, not explanatory. It is clearly preliminary. The aim has been to stimulate the
reader to consider the potential issues that
may arise with the development of reversible sterilization.

In many respects, the issues that have
been raised in this paper would also be
raised with regard to other prospective
developments in human contraception.
For example, a slow-release removable
birth control pill to be implanted in the
body may soon be developed. And then, at
a given time, it would be removed. Such a
development, like reversible sterilization,
would decrease the voluntary participation of the patient. Unlike the pill, the
condom, or the diaphram, and to a lesser
degree intrauterine devices, contro] over

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 2

reproduction would not be directly in the
hands of the user; instead, the user would
have to depend upon the expertise of a
physician.

Thus, reversible sterilization, along
with developments such as a pill implant
for long-term birth contro), may further
insure the effectiveness of contraception.
But concomitantly, they may add further

 

Reversible

Sterilization 143

concern about the individual’s direct control over his/her reproductive potential.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author would like to acknowledge the
assistance of library personnel at the Hastings
Center Institute, the Kennedy Institute, and
Mansfield State College. The research was
supported by a travel grant received from
Mansfield State College.

REFERENCES

ANONYMous. 1974. Montana eugenic sterilization
law applies to retardates. Pediat. News 8
(June):6-7.

BORDERS, WILLIAM. 1976. Mrs. Gandhi confirms
some died in protests over sterilization drive. New
York Times, October 28, p. 15.

. 1978. Birth control slows in India. New
York Times, February 6, p. AZ.

BROWN, ROBERT S., and RICHARD CourTIS. 1977.
“The castration alternative.” Canadian J.
Crimino]. Correct. 19 (April): 157-170.

BRUESCHKE, E. E. 1976. Reversible occlusive devices. J. Reprod. Med. 17 (August):103-115.

CALLAHAN, DANIEL. 1977. Health and society:
Some ethical imperatives. Daedalus 106
(Winter):23-33.

CuEz, RONALD A. 1971. Mental disability as a basis
for contraception and sterilization. Soc. Biol. 18
(Suppl.):$120-S$132.

CHRISTIANSEN, DREW. 1977. Ethics and compulsory population control. Hastings Center Rep. 7
(February):30-33.

CLOUGH, LOUISE, VIRGINIA ABERNATHY, and
HENRY GRUNEBAUM. 1976. Contraception for the
severely psychiatrically disturbed: Confusion, control, and central indication. Comprehen. Psychiat.
17 (September):601-606.

CoHLER, BERTRAM f., D. GALLANT, H.
GRUNEBAUM, J. WEIss, and E. GAMER. 1975.
Pregnancy and birth complications among mentally ill and well mothers and their children. Soc.
Biol. 22 (Fall):269-279.

CoMER, Douc. 1975. Sterilization of mental defectives: Compulsion and consent. Baylor Law Rev.
27 (Winter): 179-198.

DIAMOND, EDWARD. 1977. Microsurgical reconstruction of the uterine tube in sterilized patients.
Fertil. Steril. 28 (November):1203-1211.

DoNOVAN, PATRICIA. 19762. Sterilization and the
poor: Two views on the need for protection from
abuse. Fam. Plan./Pop. Rep. 5 (April):28—30.

. 1976b. Sterilizing the poor and incompetent.
Hastings Center Rep. 6 (October):7-8.

DREIFUS, CLAUDIA. 1975. Sterilizing the poor. The
Progressive 8 (December): 13~19.

EISENBERG, LEON. 1977. Psychiatry and society.
New Eng. J. Med. 96 (April 21):907~911.

EL-GUEBALY, Napy, and DAvip OFFoRD. 1977.
The offspring of alcoholics: a critical review.
Amer. J. Psychiat. 134 (April):357-366.

GAMER, ENID, DAvID GALLANT, and HENRY

 

 

GRUNEBAUM. 1976. Children of psychotic mothers. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 33 (March):311-317.
GOMEL, VICTOR. 1977. Tubal reanastomosis by microsurgery. Fertil. Steril. 28 (January):59-65.
GONZALES, BETTY. 1976. Estimate of the number of
voluntary sterilizations performed 1970-75. News
release, May. Association for Voluntary Steriliza
tion, New York.

Guua, S. K., A. AHMED, and H. K. Kaur. 1976.
Feasibility study of the reversible occlusion device
for the vas deferens. Med. Biol. Engin. 14
(January): 15-18.

GULHATI, KAUAL. 1977. Compulsory sterilization:
The change in India’s population policy. Science
195 (March 25):1300-13085.

HuEBNER, AL. 1975. Dare call it genocide. Science
for the People 8 (March): 7, 20~21.

INGLE, DwIiGutT J. 1973. Who should have children?
Bobbs-Merrill Company, Indianapolis.

JACOBS, JAMES B., and Eric H. STEELE. 1977. Sexual deprivation and penal policy. Cornell Law
Rev. 62 (January):289-312.

JANKE, Lois, and WiILL1AM M. WIEST. 1976-77.
Psychosocial and medical effects of vasectomy in a
sample of health plan subscribers. Internat. J.
Psychiat. Med. 7(1):17-34.

JONES, STACY. 1977. Patents: reversible non-surgical
birth control. New York Times, August 13, p. 25.

LARSEN, JNUD S. 1976. Fascism and attitudes toward mandatory sterilization: The development of
an attitude scale. J. Soc. Psychol. 100:107~110.

McCormick, W. G., and JOSEPH TORRES. 1976. A
method of Pomeroy tubal ligation reanastomosis.
Obstet. Gynecol. 47 (May):423~-425.

MCINTIRE, ROGER. 1973. Stimulus/response: Parenthood training or mandatory birth control: Take
your choice. Psychol. Today 7 (October):34-41.

Moss, Storrow A. 1976. Compulsory sterilization
of the mentally ill and retarded. Southwest. Law J.
3 (Fall):775-781,

Murpock, C. W. 1974. Sterilization of the retarded:
A problem or a solution. Calif. Law Rev. 62
(May):917-935.

Narr, V. R. 1976. Vasoplasty: A new technique.
Brit. J. Urol, 48 (August):275-277.

PinG, H. K. 1976. Creating new classes of people.
Far East Econ. Rev. 92 (April 2):24-25.

REES, Jim. 1977. ‘Voluntary’ castration of mentally
disordered sex offenders. Crimin. Law Bull. 13
(January-February):30—49.

ROSENBAUM, DavipD E. 1977. H.E.W. to issue new

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

14.4 Largey

regulations to prevent forced sterilizations. New
York Times, December 2, p. 20.

Ross, SusAN C. 1973. The rights of women: The
basic ACLU guide to a woman’s rights. Dutton,
New York.

ROTHMAN, SHEILA. 1977. Sterilizing the poor. Society 14 (January-February):36-41.

Rupovsky, DAviID. 1973. The rights of prisoners:
The basic ACLU guide to a prisoner’s rights.
Avon, New York.

SABAGH, G., and R. B. EDGERTON. 1962. Sterilized
mental defectives look at eugenic sterilization.
Eugen. Quart. 9 (Spring):213-222.

Sack, WituiamM H. 1977. Children of imprisoned
fathers. Psychiatry 40 (May):163-174.

SACK, WILLIAM H., JACK SEIDLER, and SUSAN
THOMAS. 1976. The children of imprisoned parents. Amer. J. Orthopsychiat. 46 (October):618628.

SCIARRA, JOHN J. (ed.). 1976. Advances in female
sterilization techniques. Harper & Row, Hagartown, Md.

SCHIMA, MARILYN E., and [RA LuBELL (eds.). 1976.
New advances in sterilization: The Third International Conference on Voluntary Sterilization. Association for Voluntary Sterilization, New York.

SCHNEIDER, JAN. 1973. Counselling for sterilization.
Obst. Gynecol. 42 (November):778-784.

SILBER, SHERMAN. 1977a. Microscopic vasectomy
reversal. Fertil. Steril. 28 (February):1191—1203.

, 1977b. Microscopic vasovastomy and sper
matogenesis. J. Urol. 117 (March):299-302.

. 1977c. Perfect anatomical reconstruction of

 

 

Social Biology

the vas deferens ‘with a new microscopic surgical

technique. Fertil. Steril. 28 (January):72-77.

. 1977d. Vasectomy reversal. New Eng. J.
Med. 296 (April 14):886-887.

SINHA, ARUN. 1977. Two notes from India. Dissent
24 (Winter):94~95.

SOSKIN, RON. 1977. Voluntary _ sterilization —
safeguarding freedom of choice. Amicus 2
(February):40—44,

SPRIGGS, EDWARD. 1974. Involuntary sterilization:
An unconstitutional menace to minorities and the
poor. New York Univ. Rev. Law Soc. Change 4
(Spring): 127-151.

STOKES, BRUCE. 1977. Birth control: More people
are turning to sterilization. New York Times, May
20, p. 7.

VAUGHAN, DENTON, and GERALD SPARER. 1974.
Ethnic group and welfare status of women
sterilized in federally funded family planning programs, 1972. Fam. Plan. Persp. 6 (Fall):224~228.

WEISBORD, ROBERT G. 1975. Genocide? Birth control and the Black American. Greenwood Press,
New York.

WESTOFF, CHARLES. 1976. Trends in contraceptive
practices: 1965-1973. Fam. Plan. Persp. 8
(March/April):54-57.

WESTOFF, LESLIE A. 1978. Vas deferens in vasectomies. Esquire 89 (March 1):25-26.

WINSTON, R. M. L. 1977. Why 103 women asked for
reversal of sterilization. Brit. Med. J. 1 (July
30):305-307.

Woop, Curtis. 1976. Psychosocial aspects of sterilization. Curr. Psychiat. Therap. 16:303-311.

 
