Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Religious identity and attitudes toward
contraceptives among university students in
Nigeria

Ikponmwosa Owie

To cite this article: Ikoonmwosa Owie (1983) Religious identity and attitudes toward
contraceptives among university students in Nigeria, Social Biology, 30:1, 101-105, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1983.9988520

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1983.9988520

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

 
Brief Reports

Religious Identity and Attitudes
Toward Contraceptives Among
University Students in Nigeria

Ikponmwosa Owie

Faculty of Education
niversity of Benin
Benin City, Nigeria

5

cD)

 

oO

CABSTRACT: This study aimed at identifying subtle differences in attitudes toward the use of
o¢ontraceptives of university students from the various religious groups in Nigeria. Major and
Significant differences were observed among Moslems, Christians, and indigenous religious
“proups. The Moslem group appeared to have internalized more negative attitudes toward con“traceptives than did the other two groups. However, a considerable number of respondents
from all groups possessed negative attitudes toward contraception. In each religious group a
"dnajority of respondents agreed with the statement, ‘Contraception is an unnecessary interfer
Snce with nature.”

ch

= The purpose of this study was to inAyestigate the influence of religious afJiliation upon the attitudes of Nigerian
“‘Auniversity students toward the use of
Sontraceptives. Very little is known
“about differences in attitudes toward
contraception as a function of religious
“identity among populations in the devel“ping countries. This study attempts to
‘partially close this gap.

S

oO
© MATERIALS AND METHODS

A fifteen-item inventory was constructed to assess differences in attitudes
of Nigerian university students toward
the use of contraceptives. Religious affiliation was the independent variable.
Responses were solicited via a three
point Likert-type scale with the response positions of “‘agree,’’ ‘“‘undecided,” and “‘disagree.”’ Each response
position was weighted 1, 2, and 3, respectively. With 15 items, the scores

ranged from 15 to 45, with higher scores
being indicative of more positive attitudes.

Positive attitudes were seen as positions indicative of desires to use or to encourage others to use contraceptives.
Eight items were favorable to the use of
contraceptives; the other seven expressed opinions that were unfavorable.
All items were designed by the author
after a search of the literature. The inventory was pilot-tested with a group of
students at a college of education in
Benin City, Nigeria, in order to enhance
face validity, content validity, and identification of non-plausible distractors. A
reliability coefficient of 0.83 was computed following this pilot study using
Kuder Richardson co-ef (KR-20). The
inventory is provided in Table 1.

The sample consisted of 300 randomly selected university students. The
sample represented three basic religious
sects: 107 were Moslems, 101 were

101

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

102

Owie

 

Social Biology

TABLE 1
INVENTORY OF FIFTEEN ITEMS RELATING TO CONTRACEPTION

. Contraception is an unnecessary interference with nature.
. [would use contraceptives to maintain a desired number of offspring.

1
2
3. Those who trade in contraceptives are criminals.
4

. Uncontrolled distribution of contraceptives might tend to increase female disloyalty and unfaithful
ness.

. Contraceptive services should be a part of the school programme.

. [would encourage the government to de-emphasize the need for contraceptives among my people.

5
6. Sex education related to family planning should be a part of the school programme.
7
8

. Lwould discourage my friends from using contraceptives.
9, All decent and religious people should oppose the use of contraceptives.
10. There should be a free access to contraceptive devices by those in the childbearing age.
11. Ido not see anything morally wrong in encouraging a family to use contraceptives.
12. I would not encourage contraceptives even if they are proved to be very safe.
13. Contraceptives help families to raise healthy children.

14. There is nothing against life in contraceptives.

15. I cannot see anything terribly bad in using contraceptives or encouraging others to do so.

Christians, and 92 indicated affiliation
to indigenous religious groups. Students
were not delineated as to their respective age groups but 97 per cent of them
were between the ages of 20 and 30.
University students were used in order
to control for the influence of education
and, to some extent, socioeconomic status among religious groups. There were
213 males and 87 females.

The null hypothesis tested was that
there is no significant difference among
the various religious groups in their attitudes toward the use of contraceptives.
One-way analysis of variance was used
to test the significance of the differences
at a critical level of 0.05. Groups’ means
were further evaluated using orthogonal
comparison at the same critical level.
Respective items were discussed in
terms of simple proportions.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Findings from the analysis of data
suggest significant differences in attitudes toward the use of contraceptives
among the different religious groups.
These differences were of such magnitude that it appears appropriate to reject

the null hypothesis as stated. Observed
F-value is significant at the 0.05 level
(F=3.83, d.f. =293, P<0.05). Table 2 is
a summary of the analysis of variance
that tested the significance of the difference. Table 3 is a summary of the orthogonal comparison of the significance of
the differences between the means of
the groups.

A considerable number of respondents in each of the three groups possessed negative attitudes toward contraception. Sixty-five per cent of Moslems,
51 per cent of Christians, and 59 per cent
of indigenous groups agreed with the

TABLE 2

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE FOR DIFFERENCES IN
ATTITUDES TOWARD CONTRACEPTION AMONG
RELIGIOUS GROUPS

 

*Significant at the 0.05 level.

 
Vol. 30, No. 1 Brief Reports

103

TABLE 3
ORTHOGONAL COMPARISON OF Groups’ MEANS

is Indigenous
X?=

 

*P<0 001

Items

ember 2015

© 1. Contraception is an unnecessary interCQ ference with nature. ......... 0... cece eee eee
2 2. I would use contraceptives to maintain
ov adesired number of offspring. ..............
(2 3. Those who trade in contra© ceptives are criminals. ..............00.0005
34. Uncontrolled distribution of
r= contraceptives might tend to

increase female disloyalty

and unfaithfulness. ..........-.. 02. eee eee
5. Sex education related to

family planning should

be a part of the school

PIORIAM. 5 cscs ou ce cece eos een od ed ed pe Be

y of ve een

statement, ‘‘Contraception is an unnecessary interference with nature.”
& Most respondents disagreed with the
Ystatement, “Uncontrolled distribution
‘Sof contraceptive devices might lead to
"eincreased female disloyalty and unfaithgtulness.” Disagreement was expressed
Aby 67 per cent of the Moslems. This finding is the reverse of what the investigator had expected. It seems to indicate
that the majority of respondents were
not opposed to contraception for fear of
female promiscuity following the liberalization of contraceptive information,
materials, or techniques.

Evidence from Table 4 suggests that
the differences between the Christian
and the Moslem groups were significant
even at the 0.001 level (t=8.33,

Universit

TABLE 4
Per CENT OF MEMBERS OF RELIGIOUS GRrouPS AGREEING WITH SELECTED STATEMENTS

Moslems Chnstians Indigenous
65% 51% 59%
33% 52% 29%
63% 44% 54%
33% 29% 31%
18% 30% 1S%

d.f.=297, P< 0.001). A significant difference (t= 6, d.f. =297, P< 0.001) was
also observed between the Christian and
the indigenous group. Apparently, the
Christian group tended to have more favorable attitudes toward contraception
than either the Moslem or the indigenous group.

The majority of the respondents disagreed with the statement, “Sex education related to family planning should be
a part of the school program.” Of the
Moslems, 82 per cent indicated disagreement; of the Christians, 70 per
cent; and of the indigenous religious
group, 85 per cent. Thus, these groups
did not see any need for contraceptive
services Or sex education in the school
system. Since these people are relatively

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

104

highly educated, one would have expected a much different response. Table
4 further summarizes some of the findings.

CONCLUSIONS

Since the various religions have subtle dogmatic differences, one would not
expect them to exert the same type of influence upon the lives of people. The
differential effect of these dogmas may
be reflected in peoples’ attitudes toward
family planning, hence contraceptives.
The question which this paper investigated therefore was whether the different ideational structures of the various
religions posit varying attitudinal constructs relative to contraceptives.

Collected data indicated that a considerable number of respondents harbored negative attitudes toward contraception. Based on statistical evidence,
the null hypothesis that no significant
differences existed among the religious
groups in their attitudes toward contraception was rejected in favor of the alternate that significant differences did
exist. The general pattern seemed to be
that the Moslems possessed more negative attitudes than did the other two
groups. Evidence to support this statement can be observed in the groups’
means of 27, 28, and 31 for the Moslems, indigenous group, and Christians,
respectively.

Under a social setting in which powerful groups can veto a given measure
merely by virtue of ideational opposition, even in the absence of a logical alternative, the plight of a society can
grow steadily worse while the various
groups congratulate themselves on the
ability to maintain the purity of their
ideational structure. One cannot merely
rule out the consistent opposition to

Owie

Social Biology

family planning by some powerful religious groups as “emotive” or lacking essential cognitive basis. The emotive orientation, if this is the case, of the
opposition of some religious groups to
contraception may be as relevant to our
situation as our cognitively based argument for increased use of contraceptives.

It would be tempting here to delineate the stubborn opposition of the various religious groups to contraception
into authentically held religious ideation, institutional survival, or ideational
self defense. This would be a mere academic exercise since these are rather difficult to delineate from each other.
Nonetheless, there is a high likelihood
that the generality of opposition to contraception on the part of these groups
may reflect a pervasive conservatism
aimed at strengthening member cohesiveness and special control upon which
the powers of the various sects are anchored. Most religious institutions in
this part of the world are reticent to see
anything really new implemented, since
new things have a tendency to upset the
status quo—a threat to those in positions of power.

If religious institutions are actually
interested in the population problem,
they must look for ways to help. The
various religious institutions have at
times been in the forefront of movements for social justice, such as the civil
rights movement in the United States
and the abolition of slavery in Europe.
Calling on these institutions to reassess
their positions toward contraceptives
with a view to encouraging their use
among group members would serve as a
reminder of the traditional role of these
institutions in fostering social harmony.

In trying to identify particular groups
that need special attention in motivating

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 30, No. 1

members for positive attitudes toward
international family planning efforts,
the various religious groups should be
seen as potential candidates to be given
serious consideration. It seems logical to
suggest that any program designed for
the international community would

Brief Reports

105

more easily attain its goal if the intimate
psycho-emotional influence which the
various religious dogmas have upon the
lives of the people with whom they came
in contact is not only recognized but integrated into the program.
