Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Book notes

To cite this article: (1993) Book notes, Social Biology, 40:1-2, 152-157, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1993.9988842

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1993.9988842

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

%
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lil Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:45
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

Book Notes

THE CAMBRIDGE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF HvMAN EvoLution: Edited by Stephen
Jones, Robert D. Martin, and
David R. Pilbeam. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge and New
York, 1992. 512 pages. $95, hardcover.

Over seventy scholars worldwide
collaborated on this impressive volume
which is divided into ten main parts:
(1) Patterns of Primate Evolution, (2)
The Life of Primates, (3) The Brain
and Language, (4) Primate Social Organization, (5) Human Evolution in a
Geological Context, (6) The Primate
Fossil Record, (7) Primate Genetics
and Evolution, (8) Genetic Clues of
Relatedness, (9) Early Human Behavior and Ecology, and (10) Human
Population, Past and Present.

David Pilbeam wrote the introductory essay ““What Makes Us Human?”’;
Steve Jones, the concluding essay “The
Evolutionary Future of Humankind”;
and Richard Dawkins, the Foreword.

Over 500 photographs, maps, and
diagrams illustrate the essays within
each of the ten parts, and readyreference tables and boxes highlight
key issues and techniques. This handsome volume more than fulfills its
promise of being what a “reader needs
to acquire a comprehensive knowledge
of how humankind has developed and
how scientists set about investigating
the origin of our species.”’

The hard cover, the high-quality paper, and the nine-by-eleven-inch format make this volume a pleasure to
handle, and the typeface, spacing, and

 

graphics make it a pleasure to read. In
addition to all these riches, there are
four appendices: Who’s Who of Historical Figures, with numerous photographs; a Geological Timescale; a
World map of important sites in the
study of evolution; and a Glossary of
Terms which also includes valuable
line drawings (one of named human
tooth rows, for example). The Further
Reading section is comprised of 14
pages divided into appropriate sources
for each essay within each of the ten
main sections. An eighteen-page Index
completes the work.

With the number of illustrations,
photographs, and artwork, it is no
wonder that it takes two pages of small
type to acknowledge their sources.

For anyone interested in evolution
or who needs a ready reference for materials, tables, and maps for either introducing or teaching evolution, this
volume is an invaluable resource.

Steve Jones is Head of the Department of Genetics and Biometry at
University College, London. Robert
Martin directs the Anthropological Institute of the University of Zurich.
David Pilbeam is Professor of Anthropology at Harvard and Director of the
Peabody Museum.

BIOTECHNICS AND SOCIETY. THE RISE OF
INDUSTRIAL GENETICS: By Sheldon
Krimsky. Praeger Publishers, New
York, 1991. 263 pages. $47.95,
hardcover. $17.95, paperback.

Krimsky provides a broad overview
of the first ten years of the industrial

152

 
Vol. 40, No. 1~2

revolution in applied molecular genetics. He discusses the birth and expectations of the biotechnology industry,
the response to products of genetic
engineering, perspectives on risk assessment from different sectors of the
scientific community, and public initiatives to regulate new products.
Krimsky has been a participant observer in national and international
‘© discussions of the industry, serving on
&i the National Institutes of Health’s Re8 combinant DNA Advisory Committee
& 1978-81, as an advisor to a presidential
3 commission on bioethics, and as a conRe sultant to the Office of Technology As<, sessment. His goal is “to make avail>. able to contemporary readers and to
— those who will be reexamining the his“tory of biotechnology several generaS tions from now the opportunity to un‘< derstand what questions were being
S asked, what options were available,
‘sand what decisions were being made
=when the industrial application of geZ netic technologies was still in its in. fancy.”
- Exploring the social and political
>discourse on the direction of biotechz nology, Krimsky offers a detailed ex"3 amination of the controversy over the
< environmental release of genetically
= engineered organisms. Finally, he ex© amines the conventional role of technology assessment and suggests an alternative model that fits in with the
needs of an environmentally sensitive
world.
Sheldon Krimsky is Professor of Urban and Environmental Policy at Tufts
University.

b

HUNTER-GATHERER DEMOGRAPHY. PAST
AND PRESENT: Edited by Betty Meehan and Neville White. Oceania

Book Notes

153

Monograph No. 39, Oceania Publications, University of Sydney, Australia, 1990. 196 pages. $25, paperback.

The Fifth International Conference
on Hunting and Gathering Societies
held in Darwin, Australia, in 1988 devoted an entire session to huntergatherer demography—population increase and decrease, composition by
age, sex, and other variables, and how
the population is distributed in space.
Fifteen of the papers are presented in
this monograph, six on reconstructing
past populations and eight on contemporary hunter-gatherers. The interconnection between anthropological and
archaeological data is explored in a
number of the papers, the majority of
which deal with Australian aboriginal
populations.

GREGOR MENDEL’S “‘EXPERIMENTS ON
PLANT Hyprips.”’ A GUIDED STUDY:
By Alain F. Corcos and Floyd V.
Monaghan. Rutgers University
Press, New Brunswick, NJ, 1993.
220 pages. $34, hardcover. $15, paperback.

Gregor Mendel’s Experiments on
Plant Hybrids (1866) is the core of this
first volume in a new series, Masterworks of Discovery: Guided Studies of
Great Texts in Science. The series is
aimed at making the great works of scientific discovery accessible to students
and lay readers. In each volume, historians of science provide selected
original texts (or extracts) and accompany them with interpretive commentary, explanatory notes, and biobibliographical material.

As the series editor, Harvey M.
Flaumenhaft, explains in his preface,
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

154

the volumes in this series are not books
about thinkers and their thoughts.
They are neither histories nor synopses
that can take the place of the original
works. Instead, the volumes enable
nonspecialists to read and understand
for themselves the great books of scientific discovery.

After its discovery in 1900, Mendel’s paper, “Experiments on Plant
Hybrids,” came to be seen as the foundation of genetics. In this classic paper,
Mendel described his painstaking, pioneering experiments with different
hybrids of peas in the garden of the
Augustinian monastery in Briinn. His
experiments led, in time, to the discovery of the first laws of inheritance.

Alain Corcos and Floyd Monaghan
bring to their commentary more than a
decade of collaborative study of Mendel’s paper. In writing their interpretive text, they also draw upon their
many years of teaching science to nonscientists. They include, by way of introduction, an engaging sketch of Mendel’s life as monk and scientist.

Alain F. Corcos is Professor Emeritus of Botany at Michigan State University. Floyd V. Monaghan is Professor Emeritus of Natural Science, also
at Michigan State. This volume was
supported by a grant from the National
Endowment for the Humanities.

THe Last Ape. PyGmMy CHIMPANZEE
BEHAVIOR AND Eco.ocy: By Takayoshi Kano. Translated by Evelyn
Ono Vineberg. Stanford University
Press, Stanford, 1992. 248 pages.
$45, hardcover.

Written by one of the world’s principal specialists on the pygmy chimpanzee, this is the first comprehensive

Book Notes

Social Biology

work on the last of the African great
apes to be studied in the wild. Also the
rarest of the great apes, it is found only
in the tropical forest region of central
Zaire. The Wamba Forest is the site of
the longest continuous field study of
the pygmy chimpanzee, and this book
is a richly illustrated account of the author’s observations and experiences in
Wamba from 1974 to 1985.

The pygmy chimpanzee differs taxonomically and physiologically from
the familiar “common” chimpanzee
seen in zoos and circuses. It is smaller,
darker, and slimmer, stands more upright, and is far more active sexually
throughout its life. There are also great
differences in its behavior and its social
and ecological relationships. Throughout, the author compares the two specles, giving the reader an appreciation
of their contrasting habits.

Pygmy chimpanzees are thought by
some to be the closest living relatives to
ancestral Homo sapiens. As such, they
broaden our understanding of human
and prehominid evolution. On the basis of individual survival, they are the
most successful of the higher primates.
In most primates, “competition” determines how individuals and groups
subsist and leave descendants, and
dominate or subordinate rank determines relationships between individuals. But by pursuing sexual and quasisexual behavior during interactions—
between individuals of any age or sex
and with remarkable frequency—
pygmy chimpanzees conceal the operation of rank and live peacefully together in large groups. Their sexual
behavior also promotes food sharing,
reduces tensions between males and females, and indeed matches our own in
complexity and bonding importance.
Vol. 40, No. 1-2

After the first chapter, “Why Study
Chimpanzees?,”’ the author presents
chapters on distribution, social groups
and social patterns, food, the behavior
of individuals, sexual behavior, and social behavior and social relationships.
He concludes with a summary chapter,
“Why Are Pygmy Chimpanzees Interesting?”

The book includes 8 maps and 78
hotographs that depict the wide beavioral repertoire of the pygmy chimanzee.

Takayoshi Kano is Professor of Zology at the Primate Research Instiute, Kyoto University.

8,Dgcember 2015

EMOGRAPHY AND DEGENERATION. Eu
GENICS AND THE DECLINING BIRTHRATE IN TWENTIETH-CENTURY BritAIN: By Richard A. Soloway,
University of North Carolina Press,
Chapel Hill, 1991. 443 pages.
$29.95, hardcover.

Soloway considers how differing sci=F ntific and pseudoscientific theories of
ebiological inheritance became enSneshed in the contentious national de‘bate in Britain about ‘“‘race suicide”
"and “the dwindling family.”
© Demographic _ statistics demontrated that birthrates were declining
among the better-educated, most successful classes, while they remained
high for the poorest least-educated
parts of the population. For many people steeped in the ideas of Social Darwinism, this decline raised fears of a racial decline and degeneration that
might prevent Britain from successfully negotiating the competitive challenges facing the nation in the twentieth century.

niversity of Michigan] a 13:45 0

Book Notes

155

Soloway presents a compelling
study of the relationship of the eugenics movement to the dramatic decline
in the birthrate and family size in Britain from the 1870’s to World War II.
He shows that the appeal of eugenics to
the middle and upper classes of British
society was closely linked to recurring
concerns about the drop in fertility and
the rapid spread of birth control practices during these years.

Although the organized eugenics
movement remained small and elitist,
Soloway demonstrates how pervasive
eugenic assumptions were in British
society at least until World War II. He
also traces the important role of eugenics in the emergence of the modern
family planning movement and the formulation of population policies in the
interwar years.

Richard A. Soloway is Professor of
History at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill. He is also author of Birth Control and the Population Question in England, 1877-1930,
winner in 1983 of the John Ben Snow
Prize of the North American Conference on British Studies.

REGULATING WOMANHOOD. HISTORICAL
Essays ON MaArRIAGE, MOTHERHOOD, AND SEXUALITY: Edited by

_ Carol Smart. 233 pages. $49.95,
hardcover. $16.95, paperback.

This collection of original and lively
essays looks at the social regulation of
women through law during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and the
resistance which emerged in response.
The collection refutes the notion of
women oppressed during the nineteenth century, unable to act as their
own agents in opposition to the law.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

156

Fascinating case studies from both
North America and Europe show that
as issues of motherhood and women’s
sexuality gradually became areas of
public policy and concern, so women
acted to negotiate the law rather than
simply being its victims.

Titles of the nine essays provide an
overview of the wide range of research:
Disruptive Bodies and Unruly Sex:
The Regulation of Reproduction and
Sexuality in the Nineteenth Century;
Feminist Vigilantes of Late-Victorian
England; Child Sexual Abuse and the
Regulation of Women: Variations ona
Theme; Women and Late-nineteenthcentury Social Work; Producers of
Legitimacy: Homes for Unmarried
Mothers in the 1950’s; Representing
Childhood: The Multiple Fathers of
the Dionne Quintuplets; Whose Property? The Double Standard of Adultery in Nineteenth-century Law;
Mothers as Citizens: Feminism, Evolutionary Theory, and the Reform of
Dutch Family Law 1870-1910; and
Humanity or Justice? Wifebeating and
the Law in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries.

The authors are women scholars
from Great Britain, The Netherlands,
Canada, France, and one from the
United States. The essays were collected under the editorship of Carol
Smart, Professor of Sociology at the
University of Leeds.

THE ADAPTIVE DESIGN OF THE HUMAN
PsycHE. PSYCHOANALYSIS, EVvoLuTIONARY BIOLOGY, AND THE THERAPEUTIC Process. By Malcolm-Owen
Slavin and Daniel Kriegman. Guilford Press, New York, 1992. 336
pages. $35, hardcover.

Book Notes

Social Biology

Addressing a fundamental issue in
human experience, this work connects
evolutionary biological concepts to
modern psychoanalytic theory and the
clinical encounter. Synthesizing their
years of experience in the practice of
psychotherapy and psychoanalysis, the
authors provide a comparative psychoanalytic map of current theoretical
controversies and a new way of deconstructing the hidden assumptions that
underlie them. In so doing, they provide a new vantage point from which to
integrate competing models into a
larger picture that more fully embraces
the many facets of human nature.

Part I describes central themes in
the psychoanalytic debate and introduces evolutionary issues and concepts
as they relate to the question of what
is primary about the human mind and
the relational world in which it functions. Part II explores the evolutionary history of the ‘average expectable”
or “good-enough” environment. A
4-million-year-old landscape reveals
the dilemmas that children have faced
since our earliest hominid ancestors
began dealing with the conflict, mutuality, and deception that are part of the
normal family matrix.

Positing psychoanalytic theories as
attempts to grasp pieces of this
evolved, inner adaptive system, the authors in Part III illustrate how each theory captures separate facets, but fails
to envision the overarching, adaptive
challenges and continuing functional
requirements that shape the whole.
Part IV concentrates on the clinical
process. The final chapter reexamines
each of the major dimensions in which
psychoanalytic traditions clash and
proposes a synthesis that incorporates

 

 
 

Vol. 40, No. 1-2

essential features of their competing
views.

Malcolm Owen Slavin is Director
of Training at Tufts University Counseling Center and a founder of the
Massachusetts Institute for Psychoanalysis. Daniel Kriegman is Clinical
Director of the Counseling and Psychotherapy Center of Greater Boston.

ENETIC ISSUES IN PSYCHOSOCIAL EPIDEMIOLOGY: Edited by Ming T. Tsuang, Kenneth S. Kendler, and
Michael J. Lyons. Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, NJ,
1992. 280 pages. $45, hardcover.

‘45 08 December 2045

=. This work is Volume 8 in the Series
"In Psychosocial Epidemiology. Part
One provides Overview and Methods,
avith contributed chapters on twin stud‘tes, adoption studies, linkage and asSociation studies, genetic linkage stud“es in psychiatry, and age, period and
zohort effects on rates of mental dis‘orders.
2 Part Two is a Review of Substantive
Findings, with contributed chapters on
e genetics of schizophrenia, the gemnetics of depression and mania, genetic
‘studies of anxiety disorders, and a re
Downl

Book Notes

157

view of family and twin study evidence
on the contribution of heredity to obsessional disorder and personality.

Part Three, Examples and Applications, covers genetic latent structure
models, genetic influences and criminal behavior, and psychiatric investigations and findings from the Minnesota
Study of Twins Reared Apart.

Overall, the volume provides a critical survey of current understanding of
the hereditary component of psychiatric disorders. It analyzes the methodological strengths and weaknesses of
the techniques—both from traditional
epidemiology and from new work in
statistics and molecular genetics —used
to determine the genetic component of
these disorders. Ethical issues and the
complexity of the relationships among
genetically determined factors, social
influences and developmental variables are stressed throughout.

Ming T. Tsuang is Professor of Psychiatry and Epidemiology at Harvard
University. Kenneth S. Kindler is Professor of Psychiatry and Human Genetics at the Medical College of Virginia. Michael J. Lyons is Assistant
Professor of Psychology at Boston University.
