Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Differential fertility and normal selection for IQ:
Some required conditions in their investigation

Raymond B. Cattell

To cite this article: Raymond B. Cattell (1974) Differential fertility and normal selection
for IQ: Some required conditions in their investigation, Social Biology, 21:2, 168-177, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1974.9988103

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1974.9988103

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB ann | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
ali] Article views: 1
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 6 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Differential Fertility and Normal
Selection for IQ: Some Required
Conditions in Their Investigation

Raymond B. Cattell

Department of Psychology
University of Illinois
Champaign, Illinois

Few subjects currently call so urgently
for expert and intensive investigation as
that of fertility and IQ, on which Waller’s
recent article (1971) throws new light.
The question of whether natural selection
in modern society is ultimately resulting
in a rise or fall in the mean IQ is surely
as important as any conceivable question
confronting our society. However, Waller’s
article also shows that a number of technical and methodological issues need to be
explicitly debated. As one who has worked
long in both the social and the ability
structure aspects of this subject, I am
moved by this provocative article to raise
them. In so doing, I must necessarily throw
doubt on the conclusion that many readers
are likely to draw from Dr. Waller’s article, namely, that “all’s well with the
world” as far as the existence of a satisfactory eugenic trend in IQ is concerned.
The doubts about a eugenic trend and the
technical reasons for suspecting a dysgenic
one, as entertained by such earlier investigators as Burt (1946), Conrad and
Jones (1932), Maxwell (1969), Roberts
et al. (1937), Lentz (1927), Sutherland
and Thomson, (1927), Thomson (1950),

 

and myself (1936, 1937, 1950), seem to
have been too easily brushed aside or given
insufficient importance (Revelle, 1971) by
certain recent writers.

The central, but not the only, evidence
has generally resided in investigation of
the relation of family size to mean IQ of
the children. Part of the light dismissal of
these ground researches rests on a charge
implicit in Waller’s article that I and others
in the earlier investigations ignored the
factors other than family size which determine ultimate survival rates. Some did;
but in my Leicester study (Cattell, 1937,
1950), which happens to be one of the
largest in sample size, I specifically spelled
out the six other elements needed in the
calculation, appealing to social researchers
to coordinate efforts to obtain information
on them, as follows: (1) the effect of the
underestimation of family size, when school
children are taken, through incompleteness of families; (2) the uncertainty about
the size of genetic and other regression
effects from the mid-parent to the midsibling score and from the child tested to
the mean of his sibs, due to our lack of
exact knowledge about genetic assortive
168

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No. 2

ness of mating and the role of dominance,
etc.; (3) ignorance of the differential
death rate according to intelligence; (4)
ignorance of the differential celibacy rate
according to intelligence; (5) ignorance of
the differential barren marriage rate according to intelligence; and (6) ignorance
of the differential generation length according to intelligence. To these six eleMents given in my 1937 book, I would
now add a seventh, in view of the fact
that researches since that time have been
affected by it: (7) the contamination of
the intelligence test measures with effects
of individual educational history.

Thus, there was in fact no crass ignoring
of factors which might bias the simpler
calculation on which early investigators,
including myself, had finally to fall back
on in making their predictions at that time
(Cattell, 1933, 1937). Indeed, there were
careful attempts at shrewd allowance for
these unknowable distorters,) giving various tentative alternative conclusions. The
point which must not be overlooked is that
the more recent studies, e.g., those of Bajema (1963), Higgins et al. (1962), Osborne (1970), and Waller (1971), still
lack most of these essential pieces of the
jigsaw puzzle. Perhaps they are even less
concerned about allowing for them than
earlier investigators and too easily assume that their later, somewhat more op
1 These distorters vary so much with cultural
epoch that the evaluations must be contemporary.
For example, Langer (1972) quotes data that 90
per cent of upper-class women in fifteenth-century Florence were married by age 20, whereas
in eighteenth-century England men married at an
average age of 28-29 and women at 25-26. Also,
he cites data indicating that in eighteenth-century
France 30 to 40 per cent of women of marriageable age remained unmarried, and only 40 per
cent of men founded families. At the time of my
Leicester data, 66 per cent of female children
born were likely to be married at some time.
Since then, these levels and differentials of celibacy, marriage age, and complete childlessness
have seemingly become reduced, making family
size a more important determiner of survival of
strains,

Differential Fertility and Selection for IQ

169

timistic, conclusions are technically at a
better level than the earlier ones. Actually,
in some respects, such as size of sample
or appropriateness of intelligence test used,
it could be argued that the more recent
researches are actually less reliable than
some outstanding earlier studies.

In any case, investigators need to be reminded that there is still an urgent need
for reliable ancillary data on such modifiers as death and marriage rates in relation to intelligence and on other parameters
necessary to an insightful calculation.

Attempts to ascertain the nature of the
population genetic trend in intelligence
have utilized two lines of research capable
of yielding a mutual check: (1) projections into the next generation from birth
rates (or other fertility measures) and intelligence in the present generation; and
(2) measures of average intelligence level
differences between demographically similar groups a generation apart. My own researches utilized both of these (Cattell,
(1937, 1950). As regards the second approach, most writers today assume that
the results have shown no drop in intelligence, but, indeed, a significant increase.
Dr. Waller cites my investigation as agreeing with all the rest in showing such an
increase. However, closer scrutiny will
show that this is incorrect.

The Scottish Council (Maxwell, 1969),
Emmett (1950), the large scale U.S. Army
Study by Tuddenham (1948), studies in
Illinois schools by Finch (1946), and other
less extensive studies certainly agreed
among themselves in finding substantial increases in test mental age, for demographically comparable groups, separated by ten
to thirty years during the first half of this
century.

The consensus is certainly convincing;
but what has apparently not been noticed
is that the exception—my urban Leicester
and rural Devonshire study (Cattell, 1937,

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

170

1950)—-has a clue which proves a different rule. The difference is unlikely to be
due to the vagaries of a small sample, for
mine was a complete (2,050 family) tenyear-old cross-section of the school population in a typical English industrial city of
nearly 300,000 inhabitants, measured over
a twelve-year lapse (Cattell, 1937, 1950).
The illuminating clue (lost when writers
fail to point out this contrast of my own
and the other results) is that the measurements were here made with a culture-fair
intelligence test (Cattell, 1933, 1965),
while all the other studies used traditional
(“verbal” and “numerical”) tests (Anastasi, 1959). The outcome by my testing
was absolutely no change (statistically
speaking) over this period of half a generation.

A brief digression into the measurement
question is necessary at this point. Until
investigators give as much attention to
the nature of intelligence and the techniques of measuring it as they do the
demographic parameters of the sociogenetic process, they are unlikely to get anything but confused conclusions in this
complex field which requires a combination of expertise in two domains. For
thirty years there has been increasing evidence in research in ability structure pointing to the existence of fwo general cognitive
ability factors, not one, as such pioneers
as Spearman (1927) and Burt (1940)
once supposed. Since it is not appropriate
to enter upon detailed evidence and argument here on individual-difference psychology as such, the reader must be referred
to the technical arguments in my 1971
book Abilities: Their Structure, Growth
and Action. Suffice it to say, the traditional intelligence test can now be evaluated as measuring largely the general
factor of crystallized intelligence, while
fluid intelligence is demonstrably measured
with greater validity and distinctness by
culture-fair intelligence tests.

Cattell

 

Social Biology

Fluid and crystallized general intelligence differ significantly in their curves of
age development. The former possesses a
standard deviation IQ of twenty points
and the latter of only sixteen. They differ
in the magnitude of their nature-nurture
ratios and in the fact that crystallized intelligence is probably less affected by brain
injury than is fluid intelligence, as Horn
(1965) and others have shown. In rough
terms, we may State their relationship best,
in the new investment theory of ability,
by saying that crystallized intelligence is
a set of acquired judgmental skills, the
level of which depends on the intensity
and length of the learning programs in
which fluid intelligence has been invested.
Thus, crystallized general intelligence correlates significantly, positively, with both
the individual’s educational exposure and
his largely native fluid intelligence level.
In practical survey and other applied fields
it should be possible, by suitable contrasts
of culture-fair and traditional intelligencetest results (if necessary, aided by factor
analysis), to get a reasonably complete
separation of these two general factors in
psychometric analysis.

Except for a few pioneer studies, culture-fair intelligence tests have come into
wider routine educational use only in the
last five years. Thus, the existing data
gained by either of the above-mentioned
approaches to the fertility-intelligence
question is almost inevitably dependent
upon traditional intelligence tests, crystallized general ability measures. The substantial studies of Finch (1946) and Tuddenham (1948) on the actual generation
trend, and the otherwise unmatched
studies of Higgins et al. (1962), Bajema
(1966), and Waller (1971) relating ultimate fertility to the intelligence of the
parental generation measured when in
school, unfortunately rest on these appreciably culture-contaminated intelligence
measurements. Some salvage of more exact

 

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No. 2 _—ODifferential Fertility
conclusions might be possible from this
data by various multivariate statistical
procedures partialling out suitably weighted
measures of social status, length of schooling, etc.; but this is tricky, because of the
existence of a two-way causal action between fluid intelligence and years of education. The basis for conclusions would be
much firmer if we got to work straightaway with culture-fair intelligence tests
on new samples.

As far as the first approach to population trends is concerned (that through
fertility calculations), a method is described below whereby the new tests can
be used without waiting forty years, as in
Higgins et al. (1962) studies, to permit a
calculation. As far as the approach by direct measurement of a generation change
is concerned, there is fortunately one instance where a forty-year stretch could be
covered with culture-fair tests. At the conclusion of the testing in the City of
Leicester in 1935, a copy of the actual
test and key of this prototype of culturefair tests was deposited with the report in
the Eugenics Society, London. It was
taken out and used again in the twelveyear interval test (Cattell, 1950) of the
same total cross-section of the city’s tenyear-olds. With this available instrument
(and the cooperation of the city education
committee), an investigator could, say in
1975, add a third point to the historical
plot of IQ mean, providing what may be
the longest curve (1935, 1949, 1975) not
only for culture-fair but for any truly
comparable population-intelligence measure.

Technically, the test then used was not
quite as well designed as those culturefair tests which have been developed
through the theoretical progress made
since. But, for that matter, no culturefair test actually claims to reach the point
of being culture free. It merely reduces
substantially the error in whatever al
and Selection for IQ

71

lowances one has to make for culture. By
running this early test with the recent
form, such as the IPAT test (McArthur
and Elley, 1963), on a contemporary
group, any necessary allowance in the older
culture-fair test could be reasonably well
worked out.

With this possibility in mind, let us
return to the question of how well the
mean change of IQ (from a direct check
by testing a sufficient equivalent population sample years later) agrees with the
estimate of intelligence change made from
family size, length of generation, death
rate, etc. At first, it may seem that there
is no agreement at all, since the predictions by Lentz (1927), Thomson (1950),
myself (1937) and others foretold a decline, whereas, as we have seen, the second testings (with the exception of the
culture-fair measure) show increases both
in Britain and America. However, looking
at the matter from what we now know
about the psychology of abilities, and the
differentiation of fluid and crystallized intelligence, one must surely conclude that
the increases in intelligence, widely observed in these fifty years with traditional
tests, do not provide the right criterion
check for comparison with the genetic predictions. There is every indication that as
far as intelligence measurement is concerned, these increases are mere artifacts,
demonstrably varying in magnitude according to the nature of the test and the
educational system more than anything
else, and due to a general increase in
school teaching efficiency in verbal and
numerical areas during this particular
epoch.

Moreover, if we proceed to argue by
extrapolation from these persistent relations of degrees of test contamination to
magnitude of obtained mean intelligence
increment (and accept the fact that culture fair tests still contain a modicum of
cultural influence, as Anastasi [1964] has

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

172

well pointed out), then the fact that the
relatively culture-free tests show no change
could be interpreted to mean that on some
absolutely culture-free test, there has probably been some slight decline in the population fluid intelligence level. The inferences
from family size and intelligence that a
slight decline would be expected may not,
in short, be as inconsistent with the direct
check as recent writers seem to have concluded.

A problem which is often overlooked
when seeking to integrate intelligence-fertility findings, which are scattered over
many subcultures and years of experiment,
is that we are not dealing with a static,
standard mechanism everywhere, but with
a living historical process which changes
its nature with time and cultural locality.
It is unfortunate that there is at present
too much error in the experiments, due to
small and incomplete samples, and too
many uncertain concepts in the intelligence-test designs to permit dependable
comparisons relating the differences of
trend on fertility and intelligence parameters to differences in culture and period.
But, obviously, it is important to know
whether the things men do in Khatmandu
produce different social mechanisms from
those in the Bronx or Clapham and
whether the Forsytes and Micawbers of
1970 are following the same immediately
descriptive laws as their ancestors of 1850.

In my twelve-year-separated analysis of
the relation of intelligence to family size
in Leicester (1950), I called attention to
what seemed to be a real shift in the intelligence level of maximum family restriction (presumably through birth control
practice), from the most highly intelligent
(IQ 140-+-) and educated group to a level
somewhere around an IQ of 110. Since
birth control clinics appeared early, and
as state-supported institutions in Britain,
it might happily be the case that this
point of maximum constriction of family

_ Cattell

Social Biology

size has now moved down to the belowaverage intelligence range—say, the 80-90
IQ span—with a positive correlation of
intelligence and family size holding above
this band. But if that should be true in
1975, I hope the discoverer will not be so
unaware of methods and concepts as to
state that he is refuting my finding of
1935. The danger at the present moment,
when only a very small number of spotty
pioneer researches are available, lies in
the fact that wholesale conclusions are apparently being drawn about “the trend in
modern America,” or about the possibility
of a dysgenic trend being-“‘a mere scare,”
or conversely, that there is a dysgenic
trend everywhere, as Graham seems to
fear in The Future of Man (1970). Almost
certainly, different subcultures in Britain
and America are in markedly different
phases of the process and in very different
states of eugenic health.

Returning with this broader perspective
on the nature of the whole process to the
newest evidence offered, namely, in Waller’s painstaking paper (1971) and an
illuminating recent analysis by Osborne
(1970), we note some findings that need
theoretical assimilation. Despite Waller’s
assurance (1971, p. 133) that “examination of the correlation matrices yields
few surprises,” one encounters two values
which excite curiosity.

First, the correlation of intelligence with
social status, which is typically about 0.3
for traditional intelligence tests (Vernon,
1969; Anastasi, 1959; Butcher, 1968),
has a value of about 0.2 for culture-fair
tests (McArthur and Elley, 1963). This
gives us a justifiable expectation that the
correlation, for individuals, will be somewhere between the limits of 0.2 for culture
fair and 0.35 for traditional culture-contaminated tests. However, in Waller (with
traditional tests), we find values of 0.53
(males) and 0.43 (males and females).

It is well known that the correlation of

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 21, No. 2 Differential Fertility
intelligence with social status is much
higher if we take mean IQ scores of occupations or families; indeed, the intelligence correlation is then commonly 0.5 or
higher. In fact, when we correlate half-adozen different indices of social status
across occupational group means, the highest loaded variable in the resulting demonstrable general factor of social status
(Cattell, 1942) proves to be the intelligence of the members of that given occupation. However, Waller’s data is on
individuals, and the reason for his higher
correlations could be either (a) that Waller
estimated social status in a way which gave
greater weight to the sheer educational
Ievel reached, or (6) that the traditional
intelligence tests used in getting his data
were even more contaminated than usual
with an educational, home-background
contribution. (Parenthetically, it is regrettable that, in spite of the long-standing
basic research by Cooley (1937), Sims
(1928), Warner et al. (1949), and others,
giving leads as to the best composite of
weights, there is still so much variability.
And unfortunately the nonarbitrary, factor-estimation weights in scoring social
status, made available by my 1940 study,
have not been carried by sociologists to
higher levels of accuracy.) Perhaps all one
can infer is that since the concept of social
status, as used in comparable research by
Butcher (1968), Vernon (1969), and McArthur and Elley (1963), is not conspicuously different from that employed by
Waller, the likelihood is that the tests
Waller used have more than the usual contamination by scholastic achievement.
Therefore, his end result may show that
family size is less negatively associated
with educational level than formerly, not
that it is necessarily less associated with
intelligence.

A second unusual value is the mean
heritability value of 0.631 = 0.046, 0.668
== 0.025, and 0.654 + 0.025, when derived

and Selection for IQ

173

from (mid) parent-child regressions. The
most commonly accepted value for heritabiltiy of intelligence, namely, 0.80 (in the
most exact work of all, that of Burt and
Howard [1956], it becomes 0.83), is well
above Waller’s value. The explanation
would seem to be that Falconer’s formuia
(1960, p. 162) for deriving heritability
from the mid-parent-mid-child correlation,

namely,
WP =a2 \—, loc.
Peo Vp

is really not suitable. Here, 4 is heritability, Y7e.0 1S the observed (0) (mid) parent
(PB) (mid) child (¢). correlation, and V,
and V, are the parent and child variances,
which happen to be equal in most human
populations. This formula makes the assumption (as Falconer is careful to point
out) that parent and child environmental
contributions to the phenotypic measure
(o) are not correlated. However, as anyone familiar with my MAVA method
(1953, 1963) for analysis in human behavioral genetics will recognize, the existence of a “family tradition” effect has
to be admitted. A between-family environmental variance, ase, is one of the essential four variance components in the
observed total population variance in the
MAVA method, and its reality is recognized by Burt and Howard (1956), Loehlin (1965), and other specialists in psychological genetics. Indeed, psychological
geneticists have recognized that if parent
and child environmental components are
correlated significantly, a different formulation from the above is necessary.

Pitfalls such as the above, and many
other considerations, argue for the desirability of a specialization of the technical
concepts and formulas in human behavior
genetics away from the standard presentations in animal and plant genetics. This
development is stressed by Cattell and

(1)

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

174

Nesselroade (in press) and is implicit in
Vandenberg (1965), Cancro (1971), and
Fuller and Thompson (1960). Nonetheless,
Jinks and Fulker (1970) attempt to assimilate human behavior genetics specializations without altering the standard
notations and concepts of general genetics,
and Falconer (1960) and most geneticists
seem unwilling to develop these restructurings from the standpoint of the needs of
psychologists.

Since the human, unlike the domestic
animal, family is a cultural entity, passing
on its particular enviroment, the observed
(“phenotypic”) regression of mid-parent
and mid-child would have to be expanded
from the expression in Falconer (1960, p.
162) to:

Cov(P,C,) -+ Cov(P.Ce)
Vs
Cov(P,Ce) + Cov(P.C,)

$+ 2)

—
—

ey

where P and C are mid-parent and midchild deviations, and g and e are genetic
and environmental sources respectively.
This uses assumptions still avoiding some
further complications such as assortive
mating, nonadditive genetic action, unequal
variance of parent and child generation,
correlation of genetic and environmental
components in the general population, etc.
Since the third and fourth terms in the
numerator will then vanish, we are left
with the difference between Falconer’s estimate, as used by Waller (here written 47),
and the more accurate estimate (here written H, for true heritability), as follows:

2 Cov PC,
Vo

H=h~ (3)

Alas, this does not remove Waller’s
anomalous value, for if, as we must suppose, the covariance of child and parent
environment is not negligible, the H

Cattell

Social Biology

value is still smaller than his 0.64 value.
The simplest conclusion, and one consistent with an explanation of the other
anomaly, is that the particular intelligence
tests are more scholastically contaminated
than usual.

Waller’s final—and comforting—conclusion (1971, p. 133) is: “When the effect of size of family of origin is held
constant, the first order partial correlations
between IQ test score and size of completed family are 715.4 = -+-0.018 for males
and 735.4 == -+0.161 for females, both of
which represent a eugenic effect of IQ
upon completed family size.” This conclusion is suspect both for the above reasons
and also for its being presented as a partial
correlation. Why partial out the size of
family from which the propositus himself
comes? The eugenic or dysgenic effect in
this generation is not made any different
by the habits of the various individuals
and types of family in the last generation,
Moreover, the coefficients offered are not
convincingly significant positive (only one
reaching  < 0.05), and thus they justify
no eugenic conclusion. If we turn to the
zero order (unpartialled) correlation with
a value of +0.109 + 0.097 between IQ
and the size of the present generation’s
completed family (presumably, covering
childlessness in marriage and nonmartriage,
but not illegitimate births), we get no
better evidence of having entered a eugenic
phase. Also, there is enough discrepancy
between fluid intelligence and the scholastically contaminated intelligence in
these measures to leave open the possibility that the restriction of birth rates with
increasing education has passed, but not
the restriction with increasing intelligence.

As pointed out at the beginning, the
present topic was grievously neglected,
relative to its social importance, after the
earlier studies of Burt (1946), Thomson
(1949), myself (1936, 1937, 1938, 1950),
and others. Although the recent revival is
 

 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No. 2

most heartening, one can still (at least as
far as my brief survey goes) count the
recent crop of studies on the fingers of
one hand—Bajema (1960), Higgins et al.
(1962), Osborne (1970), and Waller
(1971). They have added new dimensions
of information—notably in estimating
total fertility, against IQ of a parental
generation, instead of depending on family
size of children tested in school—but their
sample sizes are small compared to the
earlier crop of studies. One also gets the
impression that they are in some cases
inclined to generalize too widely and optimistically from the differences they find
from the early studies.

Waller begins by correctly describing
his sample as “representative of the Minnesota population, excluding non-white
persons” (p. 124). However, Minnesota,
inheriting the tradition of the genetically
most aware and demographically best documented area of the world, i.e., Scandinavia,
is also among the most eugenic-conscious
areas of the United States, as its legislation, for example, shows. Surely, therefore,
it is only common-sense caution to conclude that what Waller (1971) finds there,
and what Higgins et al. (1962), and Bajema (1963) find in areas with a similar
background, cannot be generalized to a
stratified sample of the United States as
a whole. The direction of bias can almost
certainly be taken as presenting a more
eugenic trend than in the United States
as a whole (even apart from their omission
of what is happening within the nonwhite
population). And if these findings, nevertheless, teeter uncertainly between faintly
eugenic and faintly dysgenic trends, the
most probable conclusion is that elsewhere
they are still somewhat dysgenic.

Here Osborne’s results from Georgia offer a valuable correction of perspective.
The above studies are explicitly stated to
contain Caucasian Americans only. For
any proper concept of our national life

Differential Fertility and Selection for IQ

175

and its trends, one must include the Negro
population which these studies have excluded. Osborne’s study (1969) includes a
substantial Negro group; but even as regards the white group, the results continue
to be essentially the same as those of Lentz
(1927) in St. Louis and of Thomson
(1949) and of my study in England
(1937) a generation ago. Incidentally, Osborne’s sample size is also larger than that
in the nonconforming Bajema, Higgins et
al., and Waller findings, tending toward
those of the Burt, Cattell, Lentz, and
Thomson studies. On the other hand, we
must keep in mind that he is still operating at level of “IQ of child and size of
family to which he belongs” rather than
in terms of a total fertility with effects of
celibacy, childlessness, etc., included, as
they are in the more valuable of the recent
studies.

Actually, at immediate face value, Osborne’s family size and IQ correlations,
though still negative, are smaller than the
—0.25 to —0.30 suggested in the researches a generation ago. Thus, for whites
he finds —-0.13 which, on a sample of 369,
is significant (two-tailed) at the P <
0.014 level. And he will relieve Nobelist
Shockley’s fears that the dysgenic trend
is higher among the Negro population by
his correlation (on 300 families) of —0.10
(P < 0.082). However, when he puts
white and Negro together he gets a figure
decidely worse than the older studies,
namely, —0.37. This increase arises, of
course, from the Negro sample averaging
lower on intelligence tests and higher on
family size. One may still ask whether this
value needs correcting for (a) a possible
educational difference between whites and
Negroes likely to affect traditional intelligence tests, and (0) the fact that the larger
proportion of Negroes in his sample relative to the nation as a whole might distort
the combined correlation. With regard to
the first point, educational contamination
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

176

as suggested earlier, it is difficult to make
an insightful dependable correction. One
can only look forward, with great interest,
to the research with the Culture Fair Scale
2, which Osborne is now planning. With
regard to the second possible correction, I
have made a recalculation with data kindly
released to me by Dr. Osborne, shifting
the Negro proportion to a 12% value (the
national figure for the proportion). The
result of combining the within- and between-group variances and covariances in
this way is an r of —0.27, between IQ and
family size, which is just about central for
the studies a generation ago.

Except for the uncertainty about the
first point above, Osborne seems to be right
when he says (1970, p. 191), “Higgins’
optimistic explanation of ‘Cattell’s paradox’ would appear to be applicable only
to the white population.” That paradox,
as I believe Higgins defined it, is that a
negative correlation of family size with
mean family intelligence is, nevertheless,
compatible with the absence of any decline
in intelligence in a direct comparison of
measurements on two successive generations. It is, of course, 2 paradox only so
long as one ignores the seven influences
listed earlier and also listed in my 1950
analysis. However, Higgins’ expression is
perhaps a convenient way of calling attention to the fact that if these other influences are assumed to “balance out’ as
unbiased error, then a paradox exists in
the observed findings.

The answer is, obviously, from the one
instance (Leicester) where a culture-fair
intelligence test was used in retest, that
these “errors” do not balance out. In that
culture and at that time, the death, celibacy, and childless-family rates in relation
to intelligence just about sufficed to offset

Cattell

Social Biology

the larger families with lower intelligence.
“Just about” must be stressed, because, as
argued above, the best inference from a
joint consideration of the culture-fair and
traditional intelligence evidence on population mean IQ trends is that the IQ did
drop very slightly. Since the family size
and IQ relation is little different from
what it was, any prediction today of what
would be expected from an actual retest
will depend on whether we think these
death rate, celibacy, etc., values have
changed.

A design which offers promise of a simultaneous answer to the main questions
raised—and in a reasonable time—is what
has been called the “cohort cursive longitudinal” (CCL) experiment (Baltes, 1968;
Cattell, 1971, p. 162). Therein, a suitably
demographically stratified sample is taken
at each five-year age interval from birth
to, say, age 65. After testing for intelligence (except, of course, the newborn),
the experimenter needs to keep contact
with all groups for five years, recording
marriages, deaths, births in each. This experiment could provide the information
necessary for relating IQ at once to the
variables (family size, celibacy, childless
families, length of generation, etc.) needed
for making a complete calculation. The
cost would be mainly that of a social
worker and the clerical recording necessary to keep contact with approximately
1,200 subjects for five years. Both culturefair and traditional tests could be given
to the 1,200 to explore the differences of
conclusion for the two types of measure.
Such a CCE design would involve a very
small investment relative to the insightful
practical guidance it would offer for important national education, welfare, and
family planning programs.

REFERENCES

Anastasi, A. 1959, Differentiating effect of intelligence and social status. Eugen. Quart. 6:84-91.

. 1964. Culture fair testing. Educ. Horiz.
43:26-30.

 

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No. 2

BayemMa, C. 1963. Estimation of the direction and
intensity of natural selection in relation to
human intelligence by means of the intrinsic
rate of natural increase. Eugen. Quart. 10:175187.

 

. 1966. Relation of fertility to educational
attainment in a Kalamazoo public school popuJation: A follow-up study. Eugen. Quart.
13: 306-315,

Battes, P. B. 1968. Longitudinal and cross-sectional sequences in the study of age and generation effects. Hum. Devel. 11:145-171.

Burr, C. 1940, Factors of the mind. Univ. of
London Press, London.

. 1946, Intelligence and fertility. Hamilton,
London.

Burt, C., and M. Howarp. 1956. The multifactorial theory of inheritance and its application
to intelligence. Brit. J. Statist. Psychol. 9:95131.

Butcuer, H. J. 1968. Human intelligence: Its
nature and assessment. Methuen, London.

Cancro, J. 1971. Intelligence: Its nature, genetics
and development, Univ. of Illinois Press, Ur
ana,

Cartett, R. B. 1933. The Cattell intelligence
tests, scales I, II and IH. Harrap, London.

. 1936. Is national intelligence declining?

Eugen. Rev. 27:181-203.

. 1937. The fight for our national intelli
gence. King, London.

. 1938. Some changes in social life in a

community with a falling intelligence quotient.

Brit. J. Psychol. 28:430-450.

. 1942. The concept of social status. J. Soc.

Psychol. 15:293-308.

. 1950. The fate of national intelligence:

Test of a thirteen-year prediction. Eugen. Rev.

42:136-148.

. 1953. Research designs in psychological

genetics with special reference to the multiple

variance method. Amer, J. Hum. Genet. 5:76
93.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

. 1963. The interaction of hereditary and
environmental! influences. Brit. J. Statist. Psychol. 16:191-210,

. 1965. The IPAT culture fair intelligence
scales 1, 2 and 3. Third edition. Institute for
Fersonality and Ability Testing, Champaign,

 

. 1971. Abilities: Their structure, growth
and action. Houghton Mifflin, Boston.

Catrerz, R. B., and J. R. Nesserroape. Methodology and concepts in human behavior genetics. In press.

Conrap, H. S., and H. E. Jones. 1932. A field
study of the differential birth rate. J. Amer.
Statist. Assoc. 27:153~-159.

Cootry, C. H. 1937. Social organization. Scribner,
New York.

Eurmett, W. G. 1950. The trend of intelligence
in certain districts of England. Pop. Stud.
3:324-337.

Fatconer, D. S, 1960. Introduction to quantitative genetics. Ronald Press, New York.

Fincy, T. H. 1946. Enrollment increases and

 

Differential Fertility and Selection for IQ

177

changes in the mental level of the high school
population. Appl. Psycho]. Monog. 10:75.

Futter, J. L., and W. R. THompson. 1960. Behavior genetics, Wiley, New York.

GrAHAM, R. K. 1970, The future of man. Christopher Publishing Co., North Quincy, Calif.

Hicctns, J. V., E. W. Reep, and S. C. REeEp.
1962. Intelligence and family size: A paradox
resolved. Eugen. Quart. 9:84-90.

Horn, J. L. 1965. Fluid and crystallized intelligence: A factor analytic study of the structure
among primary mental abilities. Doctoral dissertation, Univ. of Illinois.

Juvxs, J. L., and D. W. Furxer, 1970. Comparison of the biometrical, genetical, MAVA, and
classical approaches to the analysis of human
behavior. Psychol, Bull. 73:311-349,

Lancer, W. L. 1972, Checks on population
growth, 1750-1850. Scien. Amer. 226:92-99.
Lentz, F. F, 1927. Relation of 1.Q. to size of

family. J. Educ. Psychol. 18:486-496.

LotxHiiw, J. C. 1965. Some methodological problems in Cattell’s multiple variance analysis.
Psychol. Rev. 72:156-161.

Maxwett, J. 1969. Intelligence, education, and
fertility: A comparison between the 1932 and
aa Scottish surveys. J. Biosoc. Sci. 1:267271.

McArtTuHor, R. T., and W. B. Etrey. 1963. The
reduction of socio-economic bias in intelligence
testing. Brit. J. Educ. Psychol. 33:107-119.

OsBoRNE, R. T. 1970. Population pollution. J.
Psychol. %76:187-—191.

REVELLE, R. 1971. Rapid population growth, consequences and policy implications. Johns Hopkins Univ, Press, Baltimore.

Roserts, J. A. F., R. M. Norman, and R. GrirFITHS. 1937, Studies on a child population, III.
Intelligence and family size. Ann. Eugen. 8:175215.

Srus, V. M. 1928. The measurement of socioeconomic status. Public School Publishing Co.,
Bloomington, IIl.

SPEARMAN, C. 1927. The abilities of man. Macmillan, London.

SUTHERLAND, H. E. G., and G, H. Txomsow.
1927. The correlation between intelligence and
family size. Brit. J. Psychol. 17:81~-92.

THomson, G. H. 1950. Intelligence and fertility.
Eugen. Rev. 41:163-170.

THomson, G. H., et al. 1949. The trend of Scotsh intelligence. Univ. of London Press, Lon
on.

TUDDENHAM, R. D, 1948. Soldier intelligence in
World Wars I and II. Amer. Psychol. 3:54—56.

VANDENBERG, S. G. 1965. Methods and goals in
human behavior genetics. Academic Press, New

ork.

Vernon, P. E. 1969. Intelligence and cultural environment, Methuen, London.

WALLER, J. H. 1971. Differential reproduction:
Its relation to 1.Q. test score, education, and
occupation. Soc. Biol. 18:122~-136.

Warner, W. L., M. Merxer, and K, Exris. 1949,
Social class in America: A manual of procedure for the measurement of social status.
Science Research Associates, Chicago,

 
