Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Family type, family resources, and fertility among
lranian peasant women

Akbar Aghajanian

To cite this article: Akbar Aghajanian (1978) Family type, family resources, and fertility among
Iranian peasant women, Social Biology, 25:3, 205-209, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1978.9988339

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1978.9988339

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lal Article views: 3

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

 

Family Type, Family Resources, and

Fertility Among Iranian Peasant
Women

Akbar Aghajanian*

Department of Sociology
Pahlavi University
Shiraz, Iran

 

ABSTRACT: The relationship between family type and fertility among Iranian peasant women 1s
examined through multiple classification analysis. It is shown that peasant women living in
extended families have a significantly lower level of fertility than do those living in nuclear
families. The hypothesis that part of this lower fertility is due to population pressure on the
limited resources of the household is tested, and it is noted that women in extended families with
three or more “non-nuclear” members have the lowest level of fertility.

Although it has long been assumed that
the extended-family system encourages
high fertility, the empirical evidence is
limited and inconsistent. In fact, there has
been little systematic study of the relationship between family type and fertility
(Namboodiri, 1972). Studies done in developing countries are not comparable
methodologically and have produced inconsistent findings.

One of the important issues in testing
hypotheses about family type and fertility
is the level of analysis. Thus, it is necessary to distinguish two important points:
(1) At the individual level, the question is
whether women living in extended families experience higher fertility than women
living in nuclear families. (2) The answer
to this question does not have any implication for the question of the relationship
between family system and fertility at the
aggregate level in comparing societies or
sectors of a society. Taking note of this
important issue, the present study seeks to
determine (1) the extent of fertility differ
* Present address: Department of Sociology, Duke
University, Durham, North Carolina 27706

ences between Iranian peasant women living in extended families and those living in
nuclear families and (2) the mechanism
involved in the relationship between family type and fertility.

The major discussions of the relationship between family type and fertility are
those of Lorimer (1954) and Davis (1955).
While their basic theses are similar, Davis
emphasizes the idea that the structure of
the extended family is conducive to early
marriage and high fertility. Economic solidarity, he argues, permits people to marry
earlier than they could if they had to support themselves. Furthermore, young
married couples are encouraged to have
many children to strengthen the family
line and to improve their own status in the
family. The achievement of high fertility is
facilitated as a couple shares the burden of
support and childrearing with others in
the household.

The main element within the extended
family system is the subordination of the
nuclear family to the larger kinship structure, a subordination expressed in terms of
all family affairs including childbearing.

205

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

 

206

However, the question can be raised of
whether the subordination of the nuclear
family always leads to high fertility or
whether the fertility level is dictated by the
needs and circumstances of the family. It
seems more plausible to assume that the
extended family has a structure flexible
enough to repress or to encourage fertility
based on the demographic and economic
circumstances of the household.

Among other factors, family resources
are a fundamental determinant of fertility
(Beaver, 1975). Within peasant communities, the key resource, the one making life possible, is land. Hence, the limitation of land has an important repressing
effect on fertility (Slicher Van Bath, 1969;
Friedlander, 1969; Easterlin, 1971). Accordingly, if mortality, and particularly
child mortality, has decreased in a peasant
community and the resources (land) of the
families are not expanded simultaneously,
families, and extended families in particular, are faced with population pressure.

The peasant family may respond to such
population pressure by encouraging migration to the city by some members of the
family, probably the young males. Such a
response not only relieves population
pressure, but it may also expand family
resources, since the migrants may transfer
some resources from the city back to the
rural extended family. On the other hand,
the peasant family may respond to population pressure by discouraging fertility. The
fact is, the families have to respond to the
pressure, but the type of response varies
depending on the advantages and disadvantages of the alternative responses for a
particular family (Davis, 1963). Where the
availability of urban jobs for migrants and
commuters is limited and where land is
also limited in the rural areas of the
present-day developing countries (Simon,
1974), it is more advantagous for the extended family to discourage fertility than
to encourage migration. Thus, it is ex
 

Aghajanian

Social Biology

pected that the fertility of peasant women
living in extended households should be
lower than that of women living in nuclear
families.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The data used in this study were collected in the summer of 1974 from a 50 per
cent sample (V = 505) of all once-married
women, age 15-50, living with their husbands in 25 Iranian villages in a rural area
in Fars Ostan, a southern province of
Iran. The villages differ in size, ranging
from 70 to 500 people. However, they are
culturally and religiously homogeneous.
As they are located in clusters of five to six
villages, they share such amenities as a
health clinic, primary school, and public
services. The rural area is about 200 km.
from Shiraz, the capital city of Fars Pro
vince.
Data were gathered by personal inter
view. Questions about household characteristics were asked of the husband; fertility data were collected from the wife.
Among other questions, the husband was
asked to list the name and the relation to
the head of the household of all persons
living in his household whether or not he
was the head of household. Based on this
information, the families were divided
into those consisting of husband, wife, and
their unmarried children and families having any other member in addition to the
husband, wife, and their unmarried children. The latter were considered extended
families. Table 1 shows the classification
of the families based on this criterion for
sample villages and for census data from
all rural areas of Iran. The result of
classification by type of household for the
sample villages is comparable with the
census data.

The basic statistical technique used here
is multiple classification analysis (MCA).
This technique is an extension of dummy
variable regression analysis where the

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 25, No. 3

TABLE 1

PER CENT DISTRIBUTION OF FAMILIES BY
HOUSEHOLD COMPOSITION IN THE
SAMPLE VILLAGES AND IN ALL
RURAL AREAS OF IRAN

All Rural
Household Sample Areas of
Composition Villages Iran*
Husband, wife, and
unmarried children ...... 82.4% 84.9%
Husband, wife, and
married children or
other relatives .......... 17.6 15.1
Source: Iran Statistics Center, 1966.
explanatory variables may _ represent

membership in classes rather than numerical values (Andrews, et al., 1967). MCA
obtains for every subclass of every independent variable a coefficient indicating
its influence on the dependent variable
after the effects of other variables are controlled.

RESULTS

Table 2 shows the effect of family type
on fertility for all women in the sample

Iranian Peasant Women

207

It is obvious that in addition to family
type other variables would affect the fertility behavior of the women. Among these
variables are age of marriage and education. Since few women were literate, we
excluded the wife’s education from the
analysis. However, husband’s literacy is
an important variable which ts controlled
in further analysis of the data. Table 3
shows the result of MCA procedure in determining the effect of family type on the
fertility of peasant women, controlling for
age, age of marriage of woman, and education of husband. The results do not differ much from the findings in Table 2.
The peasant women living in extended
families have borne 5.3 children, while
those living in nuclear families have borne
6.0 children. Thus, peasant women living
in nuclear families have a significantly
higher level of fertility, other things being
equal.

Earlier in this paper it was hypothesized
that the extended family may be pro- or
anti-natalist depending on the availability
of resources and the type of response to

TABLE 2

EFFECTS OF FAMILY TYPE ON THE NUMBER OF CHILDREN EVER BORN TO ALL WOMEN AND TO FARM
WOMEN: SAMPLE VILLAGES, IRAN*

ALL WoMEN FARM WoMEN
Gross Net Gross Net
FAMILY TYPE No. Effect Effectt No. Effect Effectt
Nuclear ...........000ccee eevee 416 0.23 0.23 301 0.41 0.20
Extended ..........2c. cu eueee 89 —1.10 ~—0.40 78 —1.20 —0.70
Total no. 2.2... eee eee eee 505 as . 449 5 pie ;
Gratid MOAN we ica cei cee eae Ce ete ee et BBS wiewoeee aes seem ee oe we 5.93 .......006
* Effects are shown as deviations from the grand mean. All effects, gross and net, are statistically significant at the 0.01 level.

t Net of age of woman.

villages and for those living in farm
households. It is clear that women living
in nuclear families have borne more children than have women living in extended
families. When age is controlled, the difference between the two groups is reduced
significantly. However, the repressing effect of the extended family on the fertility
level of women is strong.

 

population pressure. If the peasant family
is not relieved from population pressure
through the migration of some members of
the family, such as young males, and the
expansion of resources is limited, the only
alternative is to repress the fertility of the
couples in the household. Given the limitation of the available data, we attempted
to test this hypothesis by using the size of

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

TABLE 3

EFFECTS OF FAMILY TYPE ON NUMBER OF
CHILDREN EVER BORN TO FARM WOMEN:
SAMPLE VILLAGES, IRAN*

Gross Net
Family Type No. Effect Effectt
Nuclear ......... 371 0.41 0.10
Extended ....... 78 —1.20 —0.62
Tota] no. ..... 449 a _
Grand mean... ........... 5.93 ...........

* Effects are shown as deviations from the grand mean. All effects,
gross and net, are statistically significant at the 0.01 level.

t Net of age and age of marriage of woman and education of
husband.

the landholding of the household as a
proxy for the resources available to the
family. After standardizing for the size of
the landholding, we used the number of
relatives (anybody besides the husband,
wife, and their unmarried children) in
household as the measure of population
pressure.

Table 4 presents the mean size of

TABLE 4

MEAN NUMBER OF PERSONS IN THE HOUSEHOLD BY
FAMILY TYPE AND SIZE OF THE LANDHOLDING OF
THE HOUSEHOLD: FARM FAMILIES, SAMPLE
VILLAGES, IRAN

FAMILY TYPE
Size oF LANDHOLDING

IN HECTARES Nuclear Extended
O—4 waca tees iaawie at ssw 5.50 6.72
Oe gids eame oe ow ee ee 6.58 8.04
10 and over............. 7.19 8.84

All sizes ........0- 0c eee 5.87 7.44

household by family type and size of the
landholding. In general, extended families
have 1.6 members more than nuclear families. Furthermore, the mean household
size is significantly larger for extended
households than for nuclear households at
all size classes of landholding. That is, the
same size land must support a larger number of persons in the case of extended families. To reduce this pressure, the extended
family should discourage the fertility level
of the couples in the household.

Data presented in Table 5 confirm the »

above conclusion. After adjusting for the
size of landholding of the household, we

Aghajanian

 

Social Biology

calculated the effect of the number of
“nonnuclear” members in the household
on the fertility level of the peasant women.
The results of the MCA show the highest
level of fertility for women in nuclear families and the lowest level for women in
extended households. It is clear that an
addition of three or more relatives to the
family reduces the mean number of children ever born by about one child. One
extra nonnuclear member in the household
is associated with a reduction of 0.65 children ever born. Thus, the larger the number of nonnuclear members in the family
and the smaller the size of the landholding
of the household, the lower the fertility
level of the woman in the household.

SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

Previous studies of the relationship between family type and fertility have not
been conclusive. While various methodological issues have been discussed in
regard to the inconsistent findings, less attention has been paid to the theoretical
expectation that the extended family
should in all situations lead to high fertility. This study questions that premise.
While the structural features of the extended family may often lead to early marriage and high fertility, they also seem
flexible enough to be capable of repressing
fertility if necessary. In fact, whether the
extended family encourages or discourages
fertility depends on the demographic and
economic circumstances of the household.
If the family is not faced with population
pressure and can expand its resources, the
extended family encourages higher fertility. This has been the situation in peasant
communities of the past, as described by
Boserup (1965). However, for the agricultural societies of contemporary developing
countries, economic resources, particularly land, are limited, and the rate of
population growth is high. Hence, populaDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 3

Iranian Peasant Women

 

209

TABLE 5

EFFECTS OF THE NUMBER OF NONNUCLEAR RELATIVES ON THE NUMBER OF CHILDREN EVER BORN: FARM
FAMILIES, SAMPLE VILLAGES, IRAN*

Family Type No.
Nuclear ..... 0.0... ecw eect cece eee neeees 363
Extended with one
relative ..... ccc cw ecw eet cee eee eee 42
Extended with two
relatives 20... cc cee cece eee eee tees 21
Extended with three or
more relatives .........0 ccc ce eec eee eeee 23
Total now oo. ccc ccc cece eee eee ees 449

Grand mean....... cece ce ec eee tees

Gross
Effectt

Gross
Effect

0.20 0.03

~1.20 ~0.60

~1.50 -0.61

~0.20 -0.91

che wamaseans eas 5.93 vececececeeeeceeeenes

* Offects are shown as deviations from the grand mean. All net effects are statistically significant at the 0.01 level.
+ Net of age and age of marriage of women, level of education of husband and size of the landholding of the households.

tion pressure and limitation of land are
important intervening variables in the relationship between family type and fertility level. The higher the number of nonnuclear members of the family and the
fewer the resources of the family, the
lower the level of fertility of women in the
household.

Data from Iranian peasant families presented in this study supported the above
hypothesis. It was observed that fertility is
significantly higher for Iranian peasant
women living in nuclear families than for
those living in extended families. This
finding did not change when the effect of
sociodemographic variables was con
trolled. Furthermore, after adjusting for
the size of the landholding of the household and controlling for other variables,
we find that the number of children ever
born to the women decreases as the number of the nonnuclear members of the family increases. Thus, the lowest level of fertility is found for peasant women living in
the household with the highest number of
nonnuclear members.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The data used for this study were collected
as part of a research project financially supported by Pahlavi Population Center, Pahlavi
University, Shiraz, Iran.

REFERENCES

ANDREWS, F. M., J. M. Morcan, and J. A.
SOAQUIST. 1967. Multiple classification analysis: A
report on computer program for multiple regression using categorical predictors. Survey Research
Center; Ann Arbor.

BEAVER, S. E. 1975. Demographic transition reinterpreted. Lexington Books, Lexington, Mass.

BoserRup, E. 1965. Conditions of agricultural
growth. Adline Press, Chicago.

Davis, K. 1955. Institutional patterns favoring high
fertility in underdeveloped areas. Eugen. Quart.
2:345-366.

. 1963. The theory of change and response in
modern demographic history. Pop. Index
29:345-369.

EASTERLIN, R. A. 1971. Does population adjust to

 

environment. Amer. Econ. Rev. 61:399-407.

FRIEDLANDER, D. 1969. Demographic response and
population change. Demography 6:359-381.

IRAN STATISTICS CENTER. 1966. National census of
population and housing, November, 1966. Total
country. Plan Organization, Iran Statistics Center,
Tehran.

NAMBOODIRI, K. 1972. The integrative potential of a
fertility model: An analytical test. Pop. Stud.
26:464—485.

SIMON, J. L. 1974. The effect of income on fertility.
Monograph 19. Carolina Population Center,
Chapel Hill.

SLICHER VAN Batu, B. H. 1969. Historical demography and the social and economic development of
Netherlands, Daedalus 97:604—621.

 

 

 
