Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Effect of number, order, and spacing of siblings on
child and adult outcomes: An overview of current
research

David M. Heer

To cite this article: David M. Heer (1986) Effect of number, order, and spacing of siblings on
child and adult outcomes: An overview of current research, Social Biology, 33:1-2, 1-4, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1986.998861 7

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1986.9988617

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB crs | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 22
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 2 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:41

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Effect of Number, Order, and Spacing
of Siblings on Child and Adult Outcomes:
An Overview of Current Research

David M. Heer

Population Research Laboratory
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California

 

ABSTRACT: One of the most important decisions facing married couples is how many children to
have and when to have them. Unfortunately, research to date on how the number and spacing
of siblings affects the outcome for each child does not provide parents with the information they
ought to have. Two reasons for the relative inadequacy of current research are outlined and
shown to be remediable. The first of these is that research has been conducted by scholars in
different fields between which there have been substantial communications barriers. The second
is that research has been performed on data sets gathered for other purposes which do not contain sufficient information, particularly concerning the IQ of the parents and the spacing be
tween siblings.

One of the most important decisions
facing married couples is how many children to have and when to have them. A
very important consideration in making
these decisions is the trade-off between
the number of children and the potential
quality of each child’s life. Parents need
to know how an increase in the number
of their children and/or a particular
spacing between them will affect the
outcome for each child. Social science
research ought to be able to help parents
make these decisions intelligently. Unfortunately, research to date on how the
number and spacing of siblings affects
the outcome for each child does not provide parents with the information they
ought to have. This statement should
not be taken to imply that no valuable
research has been conducted on this
topic. That is far from the case. However, in view of the importance of the
topic to parents, I believe that the qual
ity and quantity of research in this area
can and should be substantially enhanced. .

There are two reasons for the relative
inadequacy of the current research endeavor; both of them are remediable.
The first is that the impact of the number, order, and spacing of siblings on
child and adult outcomes has been the
topic of research by scholars in four separate fields: human biology, psychology, sociology, and economics. As is
well known, the barriers to communication between academic disciplines are
strong. The quality of the research on
the impact of sibling variables will be improved if there are more avenues of dialogue among the scholars from the several disciplines who have engaged in it.
For example, psychologists have been
intent on investigating whether the
number, order, and spacing of siblings
has a significant effect on IQ. However,

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

2 Heer

human biologists are in possession of the
data Sets which are best suited to investigate this topic and so far these data sets
have not been extensively used. Sociologists have been primarily interested in
how sibling variables affect adult educational attainment, occupational status,
and income. Economists have also been
interested in the effect of these variables
upon adult income but one of them has
also made a valuable contribution in
showing the extent to which these variables affect investments in child-care
time on the part of parents and other siblings. Nevertheless, some sociologists
are not sufficiently aware of the work
done by economists, and vice-versa.

The second reason for the inadequacy of the current level of research is
that most researchers have had to work
with data sets gathered for other purposes. The value of future research will
be substantially advanced if data sets
can be collected with the specific purpose of studying sibling variables. In
particular, these data sets should include the IQ of both parents and the
spacing between all siblings.

I will not dwell on the need to include
the IO of the parents in data sets analyzing the effect of sibling variables on child
and adult outcomes. I do however, want
to point out why we need to have more
data sets in which the spacing between
siblings is recorded.

Social scientists have three theories
for explaining the facts observed thus far
about the relationship between the
number, order, and spacing of siblings
and child and adult outcomes. The oldest theory states that an increase in the
number of siblings or a decrease in the
spacing between them dilutes the time
and material resources that parents can
give to each child and that these resource dilutions hinder the outcome for

Social Biology

each child. A relatively new theory
states that account must be taken not
only of parental resources but also of the
resources given to each child by his siblings. A third theory contends that there
is no causal relationship between number, order, and spacing of siblings and .
child outcomes and that any apparent
relationships are spurious.

In light of these theories, how should
the sibling variables be measured? The
most important aspect of sibling number
is that it is a variable over time. Consider
first an eldest child who will eventually
have four siblings. He will begin his life
as an only child; perhaps only by adolescence will he have four siblings. The
spacing between the various siblings will
determine the total number of years in
which a first-born has each given number of siblings from none to four.

Now consider the last-born child in
this same family. He will begin his life
with four siblings. If none die, he will
continue to have four siblings. However, the number of his siblings who remain financially dependent may decrease with time. To determine the
sibling number at each point in the
child’s life, we must know—in addition
to the final sibling number—the child’s
birth order, the spacing between each
birth, and the age at which each child in
the family became financially independent or died. All of the information
about the sibling number of each child in
the family will be contained in a graph in
which we plot the number of financially
dependent siblings against the age of the
child.

However, the proper measurement
of sibling number has an additional complication. According to all existing theories, the ages of the other siblings are
relevant for the outcome for the given
child. All of the relevant information is

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Vol. 33, No. 1-2

now available only when it is possible to
construct a matrix in which the rows
present the age of the given child and the
columns the age grouping of the siblings
for whom a count of sibling number will
be made. Many such matrices could be
developed, some much more elaborate
than others. Perhaps only a small
amount of information would be lost if a
matrix were constructed in which the
rows would present the age of the given
child as follows: 0, 3, 6, 12, and 18, and
the columns would present the number
of financially dependent siblings whose
age was one of the following: under 3, 3
to 6, 6 to 12, 12 to 18, and 18 and over.
An illustration should be helpful. Table 1 presents the matrix of the number
of siblings for a child who is the firstborn among five children, all of whom

Number, Order, and Spacing of Siblings

are spaced exactly three years apart and
all of whom are financially dependent
only up to exact age 21. Table 2 presents

‘the matrix for the last-born child among

five children with characteristics identical to those in Table 1. It can be inferred
from these tables that the oldest child in
the family, as compared to the youngest
child, will probably suffer from a diminution of parental resources, probably
financial resources, in adolescence. The
youngest, on the other hand, will likely
suffer, as compared to the oldest from a
reduction of parental resources, probably time resources, in infancy and early
childhood.

I use the term sibling number matrix
to denote any matrix that presents the
number of financially dependent siblings of defined ages at defined ages of a

TABLE 1

MATRIX OF NUMBER OF FINANCIALLY DEPENDENT SIBLINGS FOR THE FIRST-BORN AMONG FIVE
CHILDREN, EACH CHILD SPACED EXACTLY THREE YEARS APART

FINANCIALLY DEPENDENT SIBLINGS BY AGE GROUP

Exact AGE TOTAL

or GIVEN Under 3 3-6 6-12 12-18 18-21 SIBLING

Child Number
Of ceuaeeaa a ae eR 0 0 0 0 0 0
a 1 0 0 0 0 1
Gece cece eee nees 1 1 0 0 0 2
12 cece eee cee 1 1 2 0 0 4
i, re ee ee 0 0 2 2 0 4

TABLE 2

MATRIX OF NUMBER OF FINANCIALLY DEPENDENT SIBLINGS FOR THE LAST-BORN AMONG FIVE
CHILDREN, EACH CHILD SPACED EXACTLY THREE YEARS APART

FINANCIALLY DEPENDENT SIBLINGS BY AGE GROUP

Exact AGE
OF GIVEN Under 3 3-6
Child
O Lies cc cece cece cece 0 1
Moan cee gag eps pata ee 0 0
6 ccc ccc cane cceeees 0) 0
LZ wee eee ee eee 0 0
| 0 0

TOTAL

6-12 12-18 18-21 SIBLING
Number
Z 1 0 4
2 2 0 4
1 2 1 4
0 1 1 2
0 0 0 0
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

given child. I consider that research concerned with the consequences of the
number and spacing of children should
be based on data sets for which some
version of this matrix can be constructed. Unfortunately, most of the
data sets which have been used to study
the effect of sibling variables on various
child outcomes have only contained information on birth order and sibling
number at time of interview; almost
none contains data on birth spacing. For
data sets without birth spacing no version of the sibling number matrix can be
constructed.

Despite the fact that further research
utilizing specially collected data sets
may be costly, I feel that it is worth
Heer

 

Social Biology

while. Choosing the number and spacing of children may be one of the most
important ways a married couple can affect child outcomes. Thus, parents
should have access to accurate knowledge of how these decisions will affect
their children’s future. If such knowledge demands a considerable expenditure of funds for data collection, these
funds will be well spent.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This paper was given as the Introduction
to the Symposium on Effect of Number, Order, and Spacing of Siblings on Child and
Adult Outcomes at the Annual meeting of
the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Los Angeles, May 27, 1985.
