Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

A scale to measure microbehaviors of oral
contraceptive pill use

Deborah Oakley & Jeffery Parent

To cite this article: Deborah Oakley & Jeffery Parent (1990) A scale to measure
microbehaviors of oral contraceptive pill use, Social Biology, 37:3-4, 215-222, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1990.9988761

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1990.9988761

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

ee
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 4

»
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 6 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:43

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

 

A Scale to Measure Microbehaviors

of Oral Contraceptive Pill Use

Deborah Oakley and Jeffery Parent

 

School of Nursing, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan; and Department of
Mathematics, Arizona State University, Tucson, Arizona

ABSTRACT: The ways in which contraceptive methods are actually used is of increasing interest
to researchers, clinicians, and policy makers. Although contraceptive “use” has multiple
dimensions, existing indicators measure only one aspect of use or combine unidimensional
measures to produce a questionable pastiche. This study uses a subsample of 612 respondents
from a larger study of first-time patients at a public-health-department family planning clinic to
develop a new measure. Psychometric properties of this measure are examined and discussed.

Contraceptive “use” as a multidimensional concept is well defined in the
clinical literature by Hatcher et al.
(1984, 1985, 1986), but the practical
definitions have not been translated into
reliable valid measures for research.
Single dimensions such as ever use, first
use, and current use have been measured, although there is no definitive
analysis of the most valid or reliable
wording for these items, nor has there
been an in-depth analysis of the effects
of interviewer instructions for follow-up
or probes, respondent self-definitions,
or researchers’ editing rules on categorization as a “user.”

Use over time, as shown by a life table, is the most highly developed research measure, as shown by Potter
(1966) and by Trussell and Kost (1987).
Life tables can account for several dimensions of use (starting, stopping, and
sometimes method switching or restarting and/or using while pregnant or
amenorrheic). But life table analysis requires a dichotomous assignment of
whether a method is used or not used.
Currently, life tables are not commonly
used to analyze gradations of use. However, pill “users” can range from those

215

who take their pills at the same time
every single day to those who take their
pills at varying times of the day, miss
pills (with or without making them up
within the recommended time limit),
and take pill “‘holidays.”’

The fact that use effectiveness is always lower than theoretical effectiveness suggests that some patterns in the
way people actually use their contraceptive method differs from the ideal. Yet
specific use behaviors that are commonly incorporated into clinical practice with clients have not been measured
systematically with widely agreed upon
measures.

Furstenberg and the group of researchers in southeastern Pennsylvania
(Furstenberg et al., 1983) found that
teenagers who reported the most consistent use of birth control were considerably less likely to become pregnant. Similarly, Henshaw and Silverman (1988)
found that one-third of the national
sample of abortion patients they surveyed conceived while they were “‘using” contraception. In some other countries, “use” has been documented more
carefully. Seaton (1985) documented
significant problems with the regularity

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

216 Oakley and Parent

of pill taking in the model family planning program in Bangladesh, even in the
first three to four months after a clinic
visit. Laing (1985) showed lower than
expected effectiveness, even for contraceptive pills, in the Philippines. And in
Colombia, Potter et al. (1988) found
that only 42 per cent of pill users had
taken their pills correctly during the two
weeks prior to the interview.

In the Furstenburg et al. study
(1983), increasingly restrictive measures
of “use” produced a variety of distinct
research indicators; and each had its
own set of determinants and outcomes.
New measures of how contraceptive
methods are actually used could contribute to knowledge of why use effectiveness is lower than theoretical effectiveness. This information could be helpful
to clinicians as they design care for maximum effectiveness and to users as they
plan their specific use behaviors. According to Urquhart (1989), underdosing and drug “‘holidays” are the most
common noncompliance problems in
prescribed drug therapies in general.
Under-dosing, over-compensation for
missed pills, drug holidays, and cycle
transitions appear to be the most common problems in use of oral contraceptive pills. IUD expulsion or self-removal
and “holidays” from coitus-dependent
methods also are common, even after
“use” has begun.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

This report is part of a larger study of
an experimental clinical intervention
with initial women clients in a public
health department’s family planning
clinic. The analysis reported here is
based on the first 612 study participants.
The aim of this paper is to report on a
new scale of specific use, or microbehaviors, in taking the pill.

Social Biology

All initial family planning clinic patients seen in the clinic for a 26-month
period were asked to participate in the
study by specially trained study nurses.
The study design included a questionnaire assessment upon entry into the
study. In addition, chart data were collected by a health department staff
member who was also employed by the
study. Outcome data were collected by
highly trained, well-supervised telephone interviewers. Special procedures
were maintained to protect confidentiality of the respondents. The health department participated in the training
and agreed to all procedures.

MICROBEHAVIOR SCALE FOR ORAL
CONTRACEPTIVE PILL USE

The scale was developed by identifying the specific behaviors required for
effective pill use, as stated in the popular
clinical handbook, Contraceptive Technology by Hatcher et al. (1984, 1985,
1986). Six aspects of use could be incorporated into a scale of items with similar
response formats. These items covered
taking a pill daily, only the woman’s own
pills, all pills in the pack, in the prescribed order within the pack, within
two hours (plus or minus) of the same
time, and use of a backup method when
needed. The response format was a 6point range that went from always to
never. The wording for each item was
proposed and reviewed by experienced
nurse and physician clinicians and by
family planning researchers in various
locations. Items were pretested and altered as necessary. They were then included in the outcome interview.

The psychometric properties tested
were those of greatest relevance to its
future use for clinical care and in research studies. These properties included its accuracy as indicated by testDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 37, No. 3-4

retest reliability and its scalability to
produce a single summary measure.

For test-retest reliability, between
two and four weeks after the first outcome interview, 30 respondents were
reinterviewed. Cohen’s kappa was used
to test for agreements between the test
and retest. The results showed that
kappa was between 0.80 and 1.0, showing high test-retest reliability for the
scale items.

The pill microbehavior scale includes
six items. All six were summary reports
that covered the period since respondents had enrolled in the study. Since we
are interested in developing a measure
of the most effective contraceptive microbehaviors, a simple mean of the item
6-point responses would not be the most
satisfactory measure for the current
analysis. Rather, we need to know how
many of these behaviors each woman
does in the way that provides the most
contraceptive protection. Clinically,
there is a valid need to distinguish between mid-range responses such as “‘often” and “sometimes.” For some research purposes, the mean value could
be important; but for scale development, clarity of what is being measured
in the summary scale is essential. Therefore, responses were categorized as either most effective or not. Depending
on the wording of the item, the response

Oral Contraceptive Pill Use 217

actually indicating the most effective
action was either ‘‘always”’ or “never.”
With this dichotomy, the six items
showed diversity in the proportion of
the first 612 study respondents reporting
that they consistently did the most effective behavior, as shown in Table 1. Although almost all women always took
only their own pills and took them in the
same order within the pack, about 16
per cent had pills left over in at least one
of the months. Only 60 per cent either
did not need to use a backup method
(were pill users before coming to the
clinic and did not miss more than the
prescribed number of pills in a row), and
less than half took a pill every single day.
A small group managed to take their
pills at the same time every single day
(plus or minus two hours) since coming
to the clinic. While every study participant did at least one of the specific behaviors in the most effective way all the
time, less than 11 per cent of this sample
reported that they did all six. Thirty-one
per cent reported doing five of the specific behaviors in the most effective way
all the time; 17 per cent, four of the behaviors; 33 per cent, three of the behaviors; 8 per cent, two of the behaviors;
and 1 per cent, one of the behaviors.
Guttman scaling techniques were
used to test the qualities of this scale.
Guttman scales are formed by a series of

TABLE 1

PER CENT REPORTING MostT EFFECTIVE MICROBEHAVIORS
FOR ORAL CONTRACEPTIVE PILLS

Microbehavior

Own pillsonly ............0.005
Always same order .............
None left atendofmonth .......
Backup method used if needed ...
Pill taken every day .............
Pill taken same time every day ....

Per Cent Most
Effective Action

beeen eee eees 98.4
ewe oe a we 98.2
aon sem eM 84.3
eee ee ee eees 60.0
ce Rd nme wd 41.8
cu Swe ESR EWS 16.7
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

218 Oakley and Parent

dichotomous variables with increasing
or decreasing frequencies of affirmative
responses. An example can demonStrate the concept. If four arithmetic
problems are ordered,

1 8+5
2. 19 x 31
3. 1/81 + 3/91
4. log (29)

correct answers to these problems require increasing knowledge. A person
able to answer the fourth problem correctly is very likely to be able to answer
the first three correctly. That is, there is
an expected pattern of response. Let
‘““—” denote an incorrect answer and
“+”? denote a correct response. The
pattern of responses one would expect
to emerge from the above series of questions is shown in Table 2. If the items
used in constructing the scale all have a
perfect response pattern, then by knowing the total score (scale score), we also
know the component responses. However, it is unlikely that all of the responses will fall into one of the above
patterns. For a 4-item scale, there are
24 = 16 possible response patterns.
Guttman analysis shows the extent to
which the observed pattern of responses
deviates from a perfect “‘scale type.”
The above problem is approached in
the following manner. First, the error

Social Biology

rate must be calculated. An error is a response outside the scale type. For example, a response pattern of ++—+
would be considered an error, since the
respondent, being able to solve Problem
4, which is presumably more difficult,
should be able to solve Problem 3. This
leads to the definition of the coefficient
of reproducibility:
C, = 1 — (total no. of errors/total no.
of responses)
= 1 — (total no. of errors/total no.
of respondents X no. of
questions).
According to Moser (1969), a general
guideline for the interpretation of this
measure is that it should be above 0.9 in
order to indicate a valid scale. Since judicious choice of the number of items
and the particular cutpoints used to classify positive and negative responses, if
dichotomous transformations are made,
can result in an artificially high value of
C,, a second measure, the minimum
coefficient of reproducibility, C,,, is
needed. It constitutes the minimum
coefficient of reproducibility that could
have occurred for the scale, given the dichotomies used and the proportion of
the respondents in each of the two
groups (positive and negative). The
minimum coefficient of reproducibility
is the sum of the maximum item mar
TABLE 2
GUTTMAN SCALING MODEL
QUESTION
1 2 3 4 ToTat CORRECT
+ + + Ss 4
+ + + keke ccc ne sec ecctesecees 3
+ + —_ kc ccc cece cece cccenes 2
+ _ _ awe wa veecenvvcceseseaes 1
- = 0

aeeeeve

 

ene ere eae everson ane
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Vol. 37, No. 3-4

ginals for each item divided by the total
number of responses. The difference between C, and C,, is the per cent improvement:
Ch = CG - Cn

Taking this measure, the final coefficient of interest, we derive the coefficient of scalability as follows:

C,= C,/(1-C,,).
Here, the denominator represents the
largest value that the per cent improvement may attain. The coefficient of sca
lability varies from 0 to 1 and should be.

well above 0.6 to show that items on the
scale measure the same construct and
are cumulative.

RESULTS

Guttman analysis was completed for
the six dichotomous items in the proposed scale. The coefficient of reproducibility was 0.949; the coefficient of
scalability, 0.739. Both coefficients indicate that the six items form a Guttman
scale. This finding implies that from the
marginal total, one can predict the response to an item contributing to the
construction of the scale.

Note however that the popularities
(i.e., the per cent of positive responses)
for using only their own pills and taking
their pills always in the same order
around the pack are nearly identical. A
different sample may produce results n
which the order of these two variables

Oral Contraceptive Pill Use 219

are switched. Furthermore, duplicate
popularities do not contribute to the
Guttman model. Finally, the popularities of items forming a Guttman scale
should divide the interval (0,1) into
roughly equal parts. In the above case,
own pills and same order are very close
to 1 and add little to the scalability. For
these reasons, further analysis was carried out in which four- and five-item
scales were considered. The five-item
scale consisted of Items 2-6 in Table 1;
the four-item scale consisted of Items 36. As shown in Table 3, both versions
form Guttman scales. The results for the
five-item scale are particularly strong.
These results imply that knowing the
scale score, which in this work is known
as the Microbehavior Scale, provides
knowledge of the response to the individual items. For example if a respondent has a scale score of 3 on the six-item
scale, it is most likely the case that the
respondent answered the first three
questions (own pills, same order, and
none left) as always the most effective
behaviors; and the last three (backup,
every day, and same time) as not always
the most effective behaviors. The actual
propensity to proceed along the chain of
correct answers is depicted in Figure 1.
Always doing the most effective behavior is shown by a “yes” choice. Reading
down the left-hand branches, for instance, we find the vast majority do take
only their own pills, and of these individuals almost all always take them in the

TABLE 3

GUTTMAN STATISTICS FOR 6-ITEM, 5-ITEM, AND 4-ITEM ORAL
CONTRACEPTIVE PILL MICROBEHAVIOR SCALES

STATISTIC

Reproducibility (C,) 2... 2. ccc eee eee eee
Scalability (Cy)... ccc ccc cc ee cence ee eeece

No. oF SCALE ITEMS

6 5 4
errree 0.949 0.956 0.939
54 Bones E 0.739 0.879 0.787
 

            
 

220 Oakley and Parent Social Biology

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a= — =" Ban
I
| 3m
Oo
ge $-—\2- $e
go
~
Zo Zo Ze
8
se
$-—— $- $so
©
v
Oo
Ee o—
S
x =
o
9
Ze 2@
3 «Ni
Zu
g Z2-——3Sr
8r
°
z+ 3x
2S
8
> 2 $e
a
~
Se
>
22
o~
°
se QN
oO
LK geo |
ow |
g3 =e ss ©
~ Zn o
° —_—
23 sn s
wn A
Ge Land
o
go = S
=e ov a
=r a
o
2 a ma
ge 2
8g &
>o ox &
26 sg
oF o
ac §
AX go Of
ot _ ov
23 on
ZR 2
o oS 2
£3 25 c
‘ °
oz aq,
go = Q
>O =) %
Z& |
28
~N _
Bw Oo
> (hy

STO Joquiaseq] 80 Ep:E] Ie [URSTYSTIA| JO Ayssoatuy] Aq popeojumog

  
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Vol. 37, No. 3-4

same order. Lower branches show
higher tendencies toward errors, so
that, of those who answer that they always take a pill every single day, more
subsequently answer that they do not
take those pills at the same time every
day (plus or minus two hours). The
right-hand branch of the figure, those
few women who do not always take their
own pills, shows a similar pattern of subsequent errors.

DISCUSSION

Existing measures of contraceptive
use have been useful because they recognized the episodic nature of some
people’s use. It has been helpful to
know, for instance, that social characteristics are related to whether a person
uses a contraceptive method at first intercourse, but not to measures of subsequent use (Hogan et al., 1985; Mosher
and Bachrach, 1987). Although the timing of first use continues to deserve subStantial individual, family, programmatic, and policy attention, there is
increasing need to encourage successful
use of contraceptive methods by those
women who are supposedly using a
method. For this purpose, we need to
develop clinical and research indicators
that will allow us to measure the process
of successful use. Measuring only the
outcome (pregnancy) is flawed scientifically since it is affected by fecundity,
frequency of intercourse, and theoretical method effectiveness. Waiting to
measure pregnancy outcome is also not
helpful clinically. Providers need to
have a quick valid way to assess a client’s
specific behaviors in order to help the
client achieve pregnancy prevention
(the goal that brought her to the clinic in
the first place).

 

Oral Contraceptive Pill Use 221

The need to change the focus of research to the quality of use by women
supposedly using a contraceptive
method is shown by Bachrach’s finding
(1984) that by 1982 only 7 per cent of
currently married women exposed to
the risk of pregnancy were not currently
practicing contraception. But the Jones
and Forrest (1989) recalculations of national data indicate significantly higher
contraceptive failure rates than had
been previously accepted. Pratt and
Horn (1985) showed that only 62 per
cent of conceptions to ever-married
women were planned at the time of conception. Furthermore, according to
Mosher and Horn (1988), while 67 per
cent of women receive birth control
counseling at their first family planning
visit, only 50 per cent actually begin using a method. Westoff (1988) has shown
that there could be a significant decrease
in unintended pregnancy from a shift in
contraception toward more effective
methods. However, even the most effective methods could be used more effectively if we knew more about the distribution of errors in use and their
determinants.

The scale proposed here is only one
of many versions that could be developed. For each method, alternate scales
could be proposed. Each should be
tested for reliability and, most important of all, predictive validity. Tests of
predictive validity for the current scale
will be the next step in the proposed program of research being undertaken.
Subsequent papers will report on similar
scales developed for users of diaphragms and condoms. Since these
methods were less commonly used by
study participants, larger total samples
are required to have an adequate number of method users.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

222 Oakley and Parent

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Support for this research project was provided by NIH grants ROI NRO1341 and SO7
RRO05796-10. Data management by Corinne
Haslett, and Nina Riley, and preliminary

Social Biology

analyses by Joanna Tsai are gratefully acknowledged. Jeffery Parent is a doctoral student in the Mathematics Department at Arizona State University. This paper was
written while he was a student of Biostatistics in the School of Public Health, University of Michigan.

REFERENCES

FursTEnburG, F. F., J. SHEA, P. ALLIson, R.
HERcEG-BaARON, and D. Wess. 1983. Contraceptive continuation among adolescents
attending family planning clinics. Fam.
Plan. Persp. 15:211-217.

Hatcuer, R. A., G. K. STEwart, F. STEWART,
F. Guest, N. Josepus, and J. DALE. 1984,
1985, 1986. Contraceptive technology. Irvington, New York.

HENSHAW, S. K., and J. SILVERMAN. 1988. The
characteristics and prior contraceptive use
of U.S. abortion patients. Fam. Plan. Persp.
20: 158-168.

Hocan, D., N. Astone, and E. KitaGawa.
1985. Social and environmental factors influencing contraceptive use among black adolescents. Fam. Plan. Persp. 17(4):165-169.

Jones, E. F., and J. D. Forrest. 1989. Contraceptive failure in the United States: Revised
estimates from the 1982 National Survey of
Family Growth. Fam. Plan. Persp.
21(3):103-109.

LAING, J. E. 1985. Continuation and effectiveness of contraceptive practice: A crosssectional approach. Stud. Fam. Plan.
16(3):138-153.

Mosue_r, C. A. 1969. Survey methods in social
investigation. Heinemann, London.

Mosue_er, W.D., and C. A. Bacuracn. 1987.
First premarital contraceptive use: United
States, 1960-82. Stud. Fam. Plan.
18(2):83-102.

 

Mosuer, W. D., and M. Horn. 1988. First family planning visits by women. Fam. Plan.
Persp. 20(1):33-40.

PoTTER, R. G. 1966. Application of life table
techniques to measurement of contraceptive effectiveness. Demography 3(2):297304.

PoTTER, L.,S. WriGuT, D. BErrio, P. SUAREZ,
R. PInepo, and Z. CasTANEDA. 1988. Oral
contraceptive compliance in rural Colombia: Knowledge of users and providers. Intl.
Fam. Pian. Persp. 14:27-31.

PRATT, W., and M. Horn. 1985. Wanted and
unwanted childbearing: United States,
1973-82. Advance Data No. 108. U.S. National Center for Health Statistics, Hyattsville, MD.

SEATON, B. 1985. Noncompliance among oral
contraceptive acceptors in rural Bangladesh. Stud. Fam. Plan. 16(1):52-—59.

TRUSSELL, J., and K. Kost. 1987. Contraceptive failure in the United States: A critical
review of the literature. Stud. Fam. Plan.
18:237—283.

Uraqunarr, J. 1989. Patient compliance: Getting stronger claims out of clinical trials.
Pharm. Exec. 9(3):82-88.

WestorrF, C. F. 1988. Contraceptive paths toward the reduction of unintended pregnancy and abortion. Fam. Plan. Persp.
20(1):4~13.
