Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Female labor force participation and fertility:
Some methodological and theoretical
considerations

Monica S. Fong

To cite this article: Monica S. Fong (1976) Female labor force participation and fertility:
Some methodological and theoretical considerations, Social Biology, 23:1, 45-54, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1976.9988202

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988202

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB crs | ei
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 5
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 1 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

 

Female Labor Force Participation and
Fertility: Some Methodological and

Theoretical Considerations

Monica S. Fong*

East-West Population Institute
Honolulu, Hawaii

 

 

ABSTRACT: A new approach to discovering a consistent relationship between female employment and fertility valid over different stages of economic development is proposed. A better
understanding of the relationship will be gained by taking into account: (1) ecological and
individual levels of analysis; (2) the life-cycle aspects of fertility and labor force participation; (3) the matching of current and historical perspective on both work and fertility; (4)
measures of fertility that provide information on both the number and the spacing of children,
and (5) an approach to measuring labor force participation that emphasizes the utilization of

labor.

This paper proposes a new way of clarifying the relationship between female employment and fertility, with special emphasis on societies in the early stages of
economic development. Whereas female employment and fertility are generally inversely related in already developed economies, no clear-cut relationship can be
found in developing economies. The absence of a uniform relationship is related
to problems of measurement for both variables. New methods of investigating the relationship that will provide better insight
into the relationship as well as improved
measurements of both employment and
fertility are given here.

A clear understanding of this relationship is needed because a number of authors have suggested increasing the employment of women as a means to reduced
fertility for both developed and develop
* Present address: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Via delle Terme
di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.

 

45

ing countries (e.g., Berelson, 1969; Blake,
1971; Davis, 1967; Heer, 1964; Kasarda,
1971). More research on the relationship
between female employment and fertility
is especially important in developing countries in order to discover if a relationship
exists, explore its underlying causes, and
suggest guidelines for more specific policy
research. Because of the ambiguous findings of research to date, a new approach is
needed.

EMPIRICAL STUDIES

The relationship between female labor
force participation and fertility has been
fairly well established and explained in
both the United States and in Europe
(United States: Bowen and Finegan, 1969;
Cain, 1966; Mason, ms.; Mott, 1972; Ridley, 1969; Sweet, 1973. Europe: Berent,
1970; de Laval, 1970; Leroy, 1968.) It is
not equally well understood in developing
countries. Since the early work of Jaffe and
Azumi (1960), a number of studies have
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

46 Fong

been done, based on both individual and
aggregate data. Because of the different
levels of analysis, these studies are not
strictly comparable. Moreover, even within
one level of analysis, different measures of
fertility and of labor force participation
render many of the findings difficult to
evaluate in relation to each other.

With these limitations in mind, the results of previous research on developing
countries can be briefly summarized as follows. A negative relationship between female employment and fertility, similar to
that in developed countries, has been found
both with aggregate data (Ben-Porath,
1970; Collver, 1968; Hass, 1972; Heer
and Turner, 1965; Maurer et al., 1973)
and with individual data (Harman, 1970;
Speare et al., 1973). Less conclusive evidence suggesting an ambiguous relationship, no relationship, or a positive relationship between work and fertility has also
been found in several investigations (Mueller et al., ms.; Stycos and Weller, 1967;
Zarate, 1967; for a list of relevant studies,
see Weller, 1971).

THEORETICAL STUDIES

Attempts have been made to reconcile
these seemingly contradictory findings and
to explain their underlying causes. These
explanations draw upon demographic, economic, sociological, and psychological theory and encompass voluntary as well as
involuntary restrictions on both employment and fertility. Voluntary restrictions
on employment are exemplified by role conflict theory (Stycos and Weller, 1967),
work location (Jaffe and Azumi, 1960),
role definitions (Fortney, 1971) and salary
levels (Preston, 1971). Involuntary restrictions on employment encompass both the
availability of employment (Preston, 1971)
and of child care (Berent, 1970), lack of
knowledge of fertility limitation (Stycos
and Weller, 1967), and social organization

Social Biology

and family structure (Youssef, 1974). Voluntary restrictions on fertility include both
celibacy and the postponement of marriage
(Dixon, 1973) and the decision to limit
fertility through abstinence or contraception (Sastry, 1973). Involuntary restrictions on fertility encompass both involuntary celibacy and, theoretically at least, a
marriage squeeze along with subfecundity
and infertility (Stycos and Weller, 1967).

A more elaborate theory of causation
from socioeconomic background to fertility
to employment in a recursive relationship
has also been advanced (Terry, 1974). It
differs from the others in its treatment of
the causal elements: (a) by postulating
joint causation by an antecedent variable,
socioeconomic status, and (8) by making
both employment and fertility change from
a dependent to an independent variable in
a recursive model.

This model goes further than the previous ones in exploring the different relationships between female employment and fertility. By attributing differences entirely
to antecedent and primarily socioeconomic
variables, it allows for no relationship at
all between work and fertility. In fact, even
when a considerable number of socioeconomic variables are controlled, empirical
data have shown a relationship (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1973¢,5; Fong, 1974;
Mueller, ms.; Terry, 1974). Terry suggests
that the remaining relationship she finds
with U.S. data can be attributed to a failure to control for all relevant antecedent
variables. If repeated efforts at control
replicate this result, as we suggest they already have, the theory, even if correct, becomes unverifiable.

Despite these efforts to explain the relationship between female employment and
fertility, through both empirical and theoretical work, the need for a more thorough
understanding of the interaction between
work and childbearing remains. The num 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 1

ber of different explanations put forth call
for a consolidation of findings into a more
parsimonious explanation.

A NEW APPROACH

We suggest that full understanding of
female employment and its relationship to
fertility cannot be achieved without measuring each phenomenon on several new
dimensions. These dimensions are basic to
research other than labor force participation as well. However, because most labor
force research to date has failed to measure
either fertility or work on several or all of
these dimensions, it is important to state
them clearly. We outline these basic aspects of work and fertility when relating
them to each other, despite the fact that
they are by no means innovative to research in general. We suggest that it is the
lack of attention to these important dimensions that is responsible for the failure
to establish a clear-cut relationship between work and fertility. Moreover, no
such relationship can be established with
confidence unless these basic dimensions of
work and fertility are taken into account
explicitly.

We are at present making plans for the
preliminary testing of this argument in a
survey of female employment in a developIng country. We hope that the results of
this survey will give a firmer basis for our
recommendations. At the same time, we
would like to contribute to the understanding of the relationship between female employment and fertility through discussion
of the new approach at this date, and we
also wish to make it available for more extensive testing.

The new approach takes into account
five basic dimensions that are new or little
used in the analysis of labor force participation and fertility: (1) the units of analysis; (2) the life-cycle aspects of work and
fertility; (3) whether the measures used

Female Employment and Fertility

 

47

are current or cumulative; (4) the nature
of the fertility measures; and (5) the nature of the work measures.

UNITS OF ANALYSIS

The use of ecological data severely limits the conclusions as well as the precision
of the findings in a study relating female
employment to fertility. Since areal data
are appropriate only for areal inferences,
the specifics of the relationship between
female employment and fertility cannot be
fully explored to advantage with areal data.
On the other hand, individual data are not
appropriate for areal inferences either
(Weller, 1973). For making national policles with respect to female employment
and fertility, it is important to study the
relationship on a national level. In order
to gain a thorough understanding, both
individual and areal data should be examined. Individual data can yield information
on the details of the interaction between
work and fertility. They are necessary for
establishing a causal relationship. Areal
data yield information better suited for
policy purposes than individual data. As
pointed out by Weller (1973), if female
labor force participation is to be used as
a policy to lower the birth rate, it must
be measured on the same level as the birth
rate, namely, with cross-sectional period
data.

LIFE-CYCLE CONSIDERATIONS

Because both fertility and employment
are likely to vary with different stages of
the life cycle and not in the same way, it
is desirable to delimit these stages into
standard five-year age or marital duration
groups. If employment presents a bimodal
curve when classified by age or marital
duration, and age-specific as well as cumulative fertility presents the typical unimodal
curves (Figure 1), then relating overall
employment to overall fertility is likely to
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

48 Fong

Percent
100

 
 
  

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20

10

Age 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50

Fic. 1—Labor force participation _rates
(LFPR), age-specific fertility rates (ASFR), and
children ever born (CEB), expressed as percentages of maximum rate by five-year age groups,
United States females, 1970 (from U.S. Bureau
of the Census, 1973 «@,6; National Center for
Health Statistics, 1974).

obscure rather than clarify whatever relationship exists between the two variables.

As is evident in Figure 1, the overall
relationship is a combination of both positive and negative relationships in each age
group. Thus, the correlation between the
measures of work and of fertility represents at best the dominant trend of the
relationship; at worst, an average of little
meaning. For instance, in Figure 1 the agespecific fertility rates and labor force participation rates in age group 15-19 are
positively related; both rates increase to
the 20-24 year age group, where they maintain a positive relationship, but decline
together. Number of children ever born increases with labor force participation rates
in age group 15-19, a positive relationship, and continues to increase in the next
age group 20-24, when labor force participation rates decline, the correlation thus

Social Biology

becoming negative. In age group 30-34, the
correlation again becomes positive, only to
switch sign in the next age group, 35-39,
when the number of children ever born declines. This latter relationship is, of course,
confined to period rates. For cohort rates,
the number of children ever born obviously
shows a monotonic increase over age. Their
relationship to labor force participation
also changes, but only with variations in
the labor force participation by age.

It is clear that relatirz fertility to work
becomes meaningful only when age is held
constant, which is most easily accomplished by analyzing the relationship in
five-year age groups. The same division
can be made using five-year marriage
groupings, i.e., marriage cohorts, but labor
force cata are rarely tabulated or collected
in this format.

CURRENT VERSUS CUMULATIVE MEASURES

When related to fertility, employment is
often measured in current terms, i.e.,
whether the woman is employed or not at
the time of interview or some specified time
period preceding it. Fertility, on the other
hand, is more often than not measured in
cumulative terms, namely children ever
born. Cumulative fertility is likely to affect current employment, although the direction is not clear. A woman with many
children may not have the time to work,
or she may have to work in order to feed
them. However, cumulative fertility will
also affect “cumulative employment.” By
“cumulative employment” we mean past
employment experience, such as number of
years worked or proportion of married life
worked. In studies relating work and fertility, it is therefore important to include
some measures of past as well as current
employment when cumulative fertility measures are used.

By the same token, current employment
must be related to current fertility as well
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. L

as to cumulative fertility. Current fertility
can be measured as number of children under five, “own children present in the
home” under five, or number of years since
last birth. It measures much more immediately the pressure of time and conflicting
demands between work and fertility. A
woman with two children born twelve and
nine years ago, for instance, will not experience the same constraints on her work outside the home as a woman with two children, born one and three years ago; yet,
measured by cumulative measures, their
fertility is the same. Hence, it is important
to include measures of current fertility,
when studying current or recent employment.

IMPROVED FERTILITY MEASURES

Fertility must be measured both cumulatively and currently, both in terms of
past fertility and in terms of recent or current fertility. Both the number of children
ever born and the number of children under, say, five years of age must be measured. A very useful approach to recent
fertility is the measurement of own children, under a specified age present in the
home, the so-called “own children approach” (Cho et al., 1970).

The “own children approach” allocates
children to their mothers in the same household. For “own children” estimates of fertility, births in previous years as calculated
by “reverse-survival” of the children present. In studying the relationship between
work and fertility, “own children” are only
enumerated with their mothers in a census
or survey. The chief advantages of using
own children data in relating fertility and
employment are: (1) as with fertility estimates, the enumeration and coverage of
young children is improved by this method;
(2) it is children present in the home that
affect or are affected by the mother’s work.
Children born but not reared by the mother

Female Employment and Fertility

49

are likely to have much less effect on her
work. However, whether the children are
own children or adopted children may be
less relevant in this context than in estimating fertility. Thus, it is through the
measurement of young children present in
the home that the relationship of fertility
and work can be understood.

Of course, fertility may, in addition, be
measured in terms of both past performance and future plans. While it is not
likely to have as pronounced a relationship
to work as own children under five present
in the home, total number of births may
also be meaningfully related to work. This
is true both of current work, which may be
influenced by the dependency burden of
children, and of past work, which may be
more or less continuous depending upon
past births. Births planned in the future
are also associated with work. A woman
who has completed her desired family size
faces a different work situation than a
woman who plans to have two more children.

Intervals between births are also related
to work. Shorter intervals may mean a
longer expectation of working life once
childbearing is completed. Combinations
of intervals and numbers such as the new
measures of child dependency proposed by
Schnaiberg (1973) also show great promise in relating work and fertility. Both in
life-cycle studies of this relationship, and
in studies of periods such as five years,
child dependency offers a clear measure of
a very pertinent aspect of fertility, principally by giving an index of the cost of
children. This index measures the cost in
time as well as in money, which may leave
a certain ambiguity, to the extent that time
and money are interchangeable.

It becomes increasingly clear that all
these measures of the different dimensions
of fertility and their potential influence
upon woman’s work may profitably be
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

50 Fong

taken into account in studying the relationship of work and fertility. This statement
is not merely a call for more complete data.
Rather, we argue that it is important to
measure one particular dimension of fertility when relating it to work, namely dependency. Own children under five present
in the home, birth intervals, and the childdependency measure all address different
aspects of dependency. It is also in their
measure of dependency that total number
of births and planned births are relevant,
again as much as substitutes for spacing as
for the actual number of children.

IMPROVED MEASURES OF WORK

Employment, even more than fertility,
will benefit from new and more detailed
measurements. The applicability of the
concept of labor force participation in a
non-Western setting has been questioned
extensively (for a summary, see Myrdal,
1968, Volume II, and United Nations,
ECAFE, 1972). Even if the concept, defined as work for income, can be used
meaningfully in developing countries, its
traditional measurement has been less than
completely successful.

The Western concept of labor force participation is meaningful only as long as
work is a dichotomy of employment and
unemployment. For the employed, it implies constant work participation by days
per week (say five or six) and by hours
per day (normally eight in Western countries). In many less developed economies,
the mean time input may not only be considerably lower, but the variance in input
per worker is much greater both on a daily
basis and on a seasonal basis. Therefore,
the traditional dichotomization into labor
force and nonlabor force, employed and
unemployed, does not yield a meaningful
measure of the supply of labor or its activities.

The very absence of unemployment com
Social Biology

pensation, as Myrdal (1968) points out,
makes unemployment too costly on an individual as well as a societal basis. Persons
who would otherwise be unemployed are
absorbed and supported by various forms
of activity with low or inefficient input of
time. In this way, male workers who become unemployed disappear among the
vast numbers of underutilized employed;
many more are absorbed directly into this
sector. Women are even more susceptible
than men to this form of “disguised unemployment,” or even “disguised employment,” i.e., they do work, but they do so
intermittently and in the context of the
household and are therefore not counted as
members of the labor force at all. For employed women, especially when they have
child and household responsibilities, the
time input is frequently both less than the
assumed full-time norm and more variable.

In more developed economies, the labor
force participation of women can be meaningfully related to fertility because variance around the full-time norm for work is
small enough not to obscure the relationship of work and fertility, and also because
the measurement of work is often considerably more detailed than the simple labor
force dichotomy.

Developing economies, however, do not
have such a well-defined full-time norm,
nor small enough variance around the
norm. For women, this can be ascribed, on
the one hand, to constraints imposed by
the labor market in terms of jobs and, on
the other, to familial constraints imposed
by childbearing and rearing. Moreover,
when data on female work participation
are gathered, they are often not detailed
enough to give information on differences
in work input.

Additional problems are introduced by
the implicit assumption of constant productivity. In a non-Western context, the
assumption of an input of skills that is both

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 1

high and constant for different workers and
results in constant productivity is not well
founded.

Thus, the statistics on the labor force
participation of either sex need to be
fleshed out to give a more accurate picture
of the manpower supply. Statistics on female labor force participation particularly
need greater detail and are even more
likely than male rates to be improved by
a hew approach to collecting data on work.
Greater detail in work information for females will, in addition, make possible more
meaningful studies of the relationship between work and fertility.

Recent developments in the measurement of manpower in developing regions,
the labor utilization end the CAMS/ODA
approach (Council of Asian Manpower
Studies and the Organization of Demographic Associates) make considerable
progress towards solving some of the existing problems of measuring work (Hauser,
1971, 1972, 1973; see also, Domingo,
1974; Hong Kong Census and Statistics
Dept., 1974; Khoo and Palan, 1974; Lim,
1974; and Thailand Natl. Statistics Office, 1974). The labor utilization approach
measures employment contrasted not only
with unemployment but also with several
forms of underemployment, namely by
hours of work, by income, or by overqualification for the particular form of employment, termed “mismatch” of education and
employment. The CAMS/ODA approach
measures work on several additional dimensions, namely work in agriculture or in
nonagriculture, work in the home or outside, work for a family member or for an
outside person, work for payment in cash
or payment in kind.

Thus, the underutilization approach
partly solves the problem of the variance
in time input by asking a question on hours
worked. If hours worked are tabulated by
the week rather than by the day, the vari
 

Female Employment and Fertility 51

ance in unknown input is reduced on two
counts: variance in hours per day and days
per week. However, the utilization approach does not take into account seasonality. The unknown variation introduced
by seasonality can be partly handled by
asking questions on hours worked at different times in the year. For illiterate populations unused to strict accounting of time,
this approach may be the best solution to
the problems of measurement imposed by
seasonal variation. For other groups, empirical testing may show a month by month
or season by season accounting of work
schedules to be sufficiently accurate. More
research is needed to determine how accurate such accounting is.

The effect upon fertility of seasonally
varying work has not been studied extensively (to the author’s knowledge, not at
all) and is, moreover, difficult to predict
on a theoretical basis. The underutilization
by income and by mismatch touch upon
problems of differences in productivity.
While productivity is of minor importance
in a microlevel analysis of the determinants
of fertility and employment, it has important implications for employment policies
whether or not they are combined with fertility policies on a national level.

Measuring underutilization by income
looks at productivity from the point of
view of actual output, assuming a close
correlation between the price of labor and
wages and a constant level of capital input and of profits. Measuring underutilization by mismatch of education and income
looks at productivity from the point of view
of potential output, assuming a close relationship among ability, education, and
work skills, Neither approach or both together give a measure of productivity, nor
claim to. At the same time, they give much
fuller information on the labor force from
the point of view of productivity than the
standard approach.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

52 Fong

When focusing on the determinants of
fertility or work on the individual level,
however, labor utilization by income and
by mismatch assumes another importance.
Work for inadequate compensation or work
not commensurate with a woman’s training
is likely to have a very different effect on
her fertility than economically and psychologically rewarding employment. Her commitment to work is likely to be much
weaker.

The entire utilization approach becomes
especially useful when relating the work of
women to fertility. We hypothesize that,
given a situation where work and child
care are antithetical, the less fully utilized
a woman is in the labor force the higher
her fertility and vice versa. Whether employment is posited as the independent
variable or as the dependent variable, the
lower the utilization of the individual, the
less keen the conflict between the work
and family—regarded in terms of a conflict of roles or simply in terms of a conflict of time—and the higher the fertility.
Thus, a negative relationship between work
and fertility will occur only where labor
utilization is high enough to cause a conflict between work and family. Similarly,
the greater the utilization, the keener will
the conflict between work and fertility become,

The CAMS/ODA approach does not address unemployment and underemployment
per se, but is used to identify subfields in
the economy particularly plagued by low
utilization. Work is classified along four
main axes, in addition to the standard labor
force/nonlabor force dichtotomy. They can
also be combined with the labor utilization
approach, to greater advantage than can
the standard labor force approach. The
four axes are: (1) agriculture/nonagriculture; (2) home/outside the home; (3) family/nonfamily enterprise; and (4) payment
in cash/payment in kind.

Social Biology

A cross-tabulation on these axes or dimensions, in combination with either approach to measuring the work force, yields
substantially fuller information on the activity of the population, the manpower supply, the employment needs, and the information required for planning development
Strategies than does a standard occupation
and industry approach.

When relating the work of women to
fertility, this approach also becomes potentially very useful. Work in agriculture, for
instance, is likely to have little or no impact on fertility compared to work outside
agriculture. Similarly, work at home is less
likely to limit fertility than work outside
the home. Work for the family is also less
likely to affect fertility than work for someone else. Payment in cash or in kind presents a less clear dichotomy with respect to
effects on employment, but payment in
cash would appear more likely to affect fertility than payment in kind. This is not
necessarily a direct causal relationship,
but more likely an indirect one through
the involvement in a market rather than
a subsistence economy, with concomitant
implications of modernization.

SUMMARY

Theoretical and logical considerations
suggest that a better understanding of the
relationship between fertility and work for
women may be gained by taking into account the considerations outlined above,
namely: (1) the ecological or individual
level of analysis; (2) the life-cycle aspects
of fertility and Iabor force participation,
through the use of small age groups in the
analysis, or cohort data, if available; (3)
the matching of current or historical perspective on both work and fertility; (4)
more complete measures of fertility, taking
into account both the number and the
spacing of children; (5) a new approach
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 1

to measuring the labor force and labor
force participation, as outlined in the
CAMS and ODA approaches.

Our main emphasis is not on the need
for more data, although that is a part of
the guidelines, but on the need for different data and different combinations of
fertility and work data. The collection of
labor force data, in particular, need to be
approached differently than in the past.
Both the gainful worker approach and the
labor force approach were designed to measure the work of men in a Western setting.
They were not designed, nor can they be
expected to give useful service, for measuring the very different work of women
in developing economies, much less in reJating work to other variables, such as fertility. It is hardly surprising that the re
Female Employment and Fertility 33

lationship between work and fertility is so
elusive under these circumstances.
Neither the labor force dimension, nor
the other dimensions have been taken
widely into account in studies of work and
fertility in developing countries. The most
frequently used dimension is the life-cycle
dimension, which is partly taken into account by the use of five-year age groups.
However, no study has been made using all
the dimensions outlined here. We contend
that the use of these dimensions is necessary to gain a full understanding of the
relationship between female employment
and fertility. Obviously, reality will provide the best test of their validity. We hope
that this framework will be widely tested
so that this outline can be built upon and
refined, if the approach proves useful.

REFERENCES

Ben-Poratu, Y. 1970. Fertility in Israel, an economist’s interpretation: Differentials and trends,
1950-1970. Rand, Santa Monica.

BERELSON, B. 1969. Beyond family planning. Science 168:533-543.

BERENT, J. 1970. Some demographic aspects of
female employment in Eastern Europe and
US.S.R. Int. Labour Rev. (Geneva) 101(2):
175-192.

Brake, J. 1971. Reproductive motivation and
population policy. Bioscience 21(5):215-220.
Bowen, W. G., and A. T. Fivecan. 1969, The
economics of Iabor force participation. Prince
ton Univ. Press, Princeton.

Carin, G, 1966. Married women in the labor force.
Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Cuno, L. J., W. H. Gragmi, and D. J. Bocve,
1970. Differential current fertility in the United

- States. Community and Family Study Center,
University of Chicago, Chicago,

CoLtver, A. 1968. Women’s work participation
and fertility in metropolitan areas. Demography
5(1) :55~60.

Davis, K. 1967. Population policy: Will current
programs succeed?. Science 158:730-739.

Der Lavat, G. 1970, Familjecykeln och den gifta
kvinnans forvarvsarbete. En _ explorativ-deskriptiv studie utford vid sociologiska institutionen, Goteborgs Universitet. Monografiserie i
anslutning till folk och bostadsrakningen i
Sverige, 1960. Statistiska Centralbyran och
Bostadsstyrelsen, Lund.

Drxon, R. 1973. Women’s rights and fertility.
UNESCO E/Conf.60/BP/11. United Nations,
New York.

Dominco, L. J. 1974. Measurement of underutil
ization among Filipino male household heads.
Paper presented at the Tenth ODA Conference,
Manilla,

Fone, M. S. 1974. Social and economic correlates
of female labor force participation in West
Malaysia. Ph.D. thesis. Dept. of Sociology,
University of Hawaii, Honolulu.

Fortney, J. A. 1971. Role preference and fertility,
and exploration of motivations for childbearing. Ph.D. thesis. Duke University, Durham,
N.C.

Harman, A, J. 1970. Fertility and economic behavior of families in the Philippines. Rand,
Santa Monica,

Hass, P. 1972. Maternal role incompatibility and
fertility in urban Latin America. J. Soc. Issues
28(2):111-127.

Hauser, P. 1971. A new approach to the measurement of the work force in developing areas.
Mimeo,

. 1972, The work force in developing areas

in Berg. Human resources and economic wel
fare. Columbia University Press, New York.

. 1973. The measurement of labor utilization. Mimeo.

Heer, Davip. 1964. Fertility differences between
Indian and Spanish-speaking parts of Andean
countries. Pop, Stud. 18:71-84.

Herr, D., and E. S. Turner. 1965. Areal differences in Latin American fertility. Pop. Stud.
18:279-292.

Honc-Konc. Census and Statistics DEpPARTMENT, 1974. Retabulation of census data for
measurement of labour underutilisation. Unpublished.

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

 

54. Fong

Jarre, A. J., and K. Azumi, 1960. The birth rate
and cottage industries in under-developed
countries. Econ. Dev. Cult. Change 9(1):5263,

Kasarpa, J. D. 1971. Economic structure and
fertility: A comparative analysis. Demography
8(3) :307-317.

Kxoo, T. H., and V. T. Patan. 1974. New approach to the measurement of the work force
—A case study of Peninsular Malaysia. Paper
presented at the CAMS/ODA Workshop held
in Manila.

Leroy, R. 1968. Esai sur la population active.
Librarie Universitaire, Louvain.

Lim, D. 1974. Further experiments in Singapore
with the CAMS/ODA framework for measuring labour utilisation. Paper presented at the
CAMS/ODA Workshop held in Manila. Mimeo.

Mason, K. O. On the relationship of women’s
labor force participation to their fertility behavior. Ms. Research Triangle Institute, Durham,

Maurer, K., R. Ratayczak, and T. P. ScHuttz.
1973. Marriage, fertility and labor force participation of Thai women: An _ econometric
study. Rand, Santa Monica.

Miro, C., and W. Merrens. 1968. Influences affecting fertility in urban and rural Latin America, p.89-117. In C. Kiser (ed.), Current research on fertility and family planning in
Latin America. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart.
46(3), Part 2.

Mort, F. 1972. Fertility, life cycle state and female labor force participation Rhode Island, a
retrospective overview. Demography 9(1):173185,

MUELLER, E., et al. Female labor force participation and fertility in Taiwan. Ms. University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Myrnal, G. 1968. Asian drama. 3 vols. Pantheon,
New York.

NATIONAL CENTER FOR HEALTH STATISTICS. 1974.
Monthly vital statistics report. Brockville. Md.

Preston, S. H. 1971. Marital fertility and female
employment opportunity: United States, 1969.
Paper delivered at the meeting of the Population Association of America, Washington, D.C.

Ruwwrey, J. C. 1969. The changing position of
American women: Education, labor force participation and fertility, p.199-250. In Fogarty
International Center, Proceeding No.3, The
family in transition. Bethesda, Md.

Sastry, R. K. 1973. Female work participation

 

Social Biology

and work motivated contraception. Ph.D, thesis. University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.

SCHNAIBERG, A. 1973. The concept and measurement of child dependency: An approach to
family formation analysis. Pop. Stud. 27(1):
69-84.

SPEARE, A., M. Speare, and H. S. Lin. 1973.
Urbanization, non-familial work and fertility
in Taiwan. Pop. Stud. 27(2) :323-334.

Stycos, J.. and R. H. WEerter. 1967. Female
working roles and fertility. Demography 4:
210-217.

Sweet, J. A. 1973. Women in the Jabor force.
Seminar Press, New York and London.

Terry, G. B. 1974. A theoretical examination of
the relationship between fertility and employment. Paper presented at the 1974 Annual
Meeting of the Population Association of America, New York.

THAILAND NATIONAL STATISTICAL OFFICE, 1974.
Progress report on the 1973-1974 labor utilization survey of the Thai National Statistical
Office. Unpublished.

Unrrep Nations, Ecare. 1972. Report and selected papers: The regional seminar on population aspects of social development. Held at
Bangkok, Thailand, 1972. United Nations, New

ork.

U.S. Bureau oF THE CENSUS. 1973a. 1970 Census of population: Employment status and
work experience. PC(2)-6A. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

19736. 1970 Census of population:
Women by number of children ever born.
PC(2)-3A. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

WELLER, R. H. 1968 The employment of wives,
role incompatibility and fertility. Milbank
Mem. Fund Quart. 46:507-527.

. 1971. The impact of employment upon

fertility, p.154-166. Jn A. Michel, Family is
sues of employed women in Europe and America. E. J. Bill, Leiden.

. 1973. Female labor force participation,
fertility and population policy. Contributed paper to the International Population Conference,
Liége. Mimeo.

Yousser, N. H. 1974. Women and work in developing societies. Institute of International
Studies of California, Berkeley.

ZaRATE, A. O. 1967. Fertility in urban areas of
Mexico: Implications for the theory of demographic transition. Demography 4:363-373.

 

 

 

 
