Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Introduction: Methodologies in human behavior
genetics

Arthur Falek & L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling

To cite this article: Arthur Falek & L. Erlenmeyer#Kimling (1973) Introduction:
Methodologies in human behavior genetics, Social Biology, 20:3, 239-240, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1973.9988048

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1973.9988048

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB ann | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
ali] Article views: 1
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 1 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:33

 
 

Introduction: Methodologies in Human

Behavior Genetics

 

Arthur Falek and L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling

Human and Behavioral Genetics Research Laboratory, Georgia Mental Health Institute, and Departments of Psychiatry and Anatomy, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia; and Department of Medical
Genetics, New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, New York

At the Behavior Genetics Association
+ meeting in April, 1971, it was decided that
cit would be opportune to organize a sym‘= posium on behavior genetics to be held at
cathe Fourth International Congress of
SoHuman Genetics in Paris in the fall of that
5 year. Based on that resolution, a meeting
= entitled “Methodologies in Human Be‘S havior Genetics” was organized as part of
£ the Congress activities by Arthur Falek and
OL. Erlenmeyer-Kimling. The papers pre‘asented at the meeting are compiled in this
“issue of Social Biology.

© Papers by two eminent workers in psy2 chiatric genetics—Dr. Eiji Inouye, Institute
Son Brain Research, University of Tokyo,
School of Medicine, Japan, and Dr. Marat
& Vartanian, Department of Human Genetics,
Institute of Psychiatry, Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, U.S.S.R.—and by
two authorities from the field of statistical
genetics—Dr. Luigi Cavalli-Sforza, Department of Genetics, University of Pavia, Italy
and Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, California, and
Dr. David Fulker, Department of Psychology, University of Birmingham, England—
are included with a discussion by Professor
Robert Elston, Department of Statistics,
University of North Carolina.

08 December 201

Inouye’s article deals with the different
approaches employed in investigations of
human behavior genetics and _ evaluates
some of the methodological issues and limitations associated with each of them. The
underlying assumptions of the biometrical
approach with application to analyses of the
genetic aspects of intelligence and schizophrenia are presented by Fulker. It is of
interest that Cavalli-Sforza also chose
schizophrenia as his area of concern on
genetic analysis. The paper by CavalliSforza and his colleague, Kidd, as compared
with that of Fulker, demonstrates that
despite the fact that much information on
this disorder has been collected in many
studies, in a variety of ways and repetitively
analyzed with up-to-date statistical techniques, this complex syndrome defined by
marked abnormal behavior patterns still
defies resolution. Kidd and Cavalli-Sforza
conclude their paper with the suggestion
that the answers to the many problems
which need to be dealt with in understanding the basis of schizophrenia lie in methodological approaches to be found in biochemistry, physiology, and toxicology. The
paper by Vartanian and Gindilis augments
this suggestion with several promising find
239

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

240 Falek and Erlenmeyer-Kimling Social Biology

ings and fascinating leads based on a variety
of biological methods.

Elston’s pointed remarks not only review
the four presented papers, but offer new

evidence pertinent to genetic aspects of
schizophrenia based on data showing a
linkage with a well-known polymorphic
genetic trait.

 
